A Critical Review of Causal Reasoning Benchmarks for Large Language Models
Linying Yang1, Vik Shirvaikar1, Oscar Clivio1, Fabian Falck1
1Department of Statistics, University of Oxford
Corresponding author: linying.yang@stats.ox.ac.uk
Abstract • Type 2: “Discovering new knowledge from data.”
Example: Here are outcomes for our business if we tried
Numerous benchmarks aim to evaluate the capabilities of
strategy A vs. strategy B: [text about outcomes]. Which
LargeLanguageModels(LLMs)forcausalinferenceandrea-
one leads to greater success?
soning. However, many of them can likely be solved through
the retrieval of domain knowledge, questioning whether they • Type 3: “Quantitatively estimating the consequences of
achieve their purpose. In this review, we present a compre- actions.”
hensiveoverviewofLLMbenchmarksforcausality.Wehigh-
Example: The patient got doses X and Y of certain
light how recent benchmarks move towards a more thorough
medicines last time and reported a 40% decrease in blood
definition of causal reasoning by incorporating interventional
pressure. What dose Z should I give the patient this time?
or counterfactual reasoning. We derive a set of criteria that a
useful benchmark or set of benchmarks should aim to satisfy. Current LLMs can generally answer Type 1 questions effec-
Wehopethisworkwillpavethewaytowardsageneralframe-
tively due to their large repository of world knowledge, but
workfortheassessmentofcausalunderstandinginLLMsand
struggle to answer Type 2 and Type 3 questions, or can only
the design of novel benchmarks.
do so with extensive additional prompting strategies (Zhang
et al. 2023).
Introduction
The ladder of causation (Pearl and Mackenzie 2018) di-
TherecentexplosioninLargeLanguageModels(LLMs)has vides baseline-level causal reasoning into three rungs:
led to widespread consideration of their capabilities across a
• Rung 1: “seeing” - describing basic statistical associa-
spectrum of human endeavors (Srivastava et al. 2022). One
tions, as defined by joint and conditional distributions
of these areas is causal inference, where multiple bench-
within the data.
marks and tasks have been proposed in an attempt to gauge
Example: What is the relationship between this and that?
LLM performance (Zecˇevic´ et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2023;
Gao et al. 2023). In this paper, we present a critical review • Rung 2: “doing” - formalizing the concept of interven-
of these benchmarks. Building on existing “causal hierar- tions, traditionally phrased in terms of do-calculus.
chies” (Pearl and Mackenzie 2018), we taxonomise exist- Example: If I do this, what will happen?
ing tasks into this hierarchy, highlighting how many of these
• Rung 3: “imagining” - reasoning about alternative or
tasks only address the lowest level of ‘causal’ reasoning. We
counterfactual scenarios, which may contradict what ac-
then propose a set of criteria that a benchmark should fulfill
tually happened.
in order to be useful for evaluating an LLM’s causal reason-
Example: If I had done this, what would have happened?
ing capabilities.
Causal hierarchies. In this review, our goal is to propose Again, many existing tasks only reach the first rung on the
criteria that make a benchmark task suitable for evaluating ladder: they measure an LLM’s ability to identify associa-
causal reasoning. We guide this by drawing upon existing tions, but do not introduce the higher-level concepts of Rung
taxonomies and hierarchies of causal reasoning in the litera- 2 and Rung 3 (Zecˇevic´ et al. 2023). The ladder of causa-
ture. tion aligns with the hierarchy from Zhang et al. (2023), and
Zhang et al. (2023) propose a three-level hierarchy for as- both of them serve as a solid foundation for the discussion
sessing the causal capabilities of an LLM: of causal reasoning.
• Type 1: “Identifying causal relationships using domain
knowledge.” Review of existing work, datasets and tasks
Example: Person: I am balancing a glass of water on my
We surveyed the literature and explored repositories and
head. Suppose I take a quick step to the right. What will
websites that host datasets relevant to causal reasoning in
happen to the glass?
large language models. Starting with review papers such as
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Zecˇevic´ et al. (2023) and Srivastava et al. (2022), we col-
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved. lected a comprehensive list of existing datasets and tasks (39
4202
luJ
01
]GL.sc[
1v92080.7042:viXra

in total) used to assess LLM performance in causal reason- Overall,suchtasksconstrainthespaceofcausalreasoning
ing. All benchmarks can be found on this Github repository: that the LLM has to act in, neglecting other types of causal
https://github.com/linyingyang/CausalReasoningLLM. relations (e.g., temporal or spacial, correlative, counterfac-
tual,etc.),allowingtargetedtrainingforthesehighlyspecific
Benchmarks for lower levels of causal reasoning contexts,ratherthanageneralcausalreasoningabilitywhich
we are interested in. Furthermore, since the LLMs are forced
We find that a significant proportion of existing tasks are to make a selection, they tend to assume causal relationships
benchmarking ‘causal parrots’, failing to evaluate how well between events regardless of whether those relationships ac-
LLMs are capable of causal reasoning and resorting to pre- tuallyexist,thusnotbeingabletoidentify‘causalratherthan
existing knowledge. correlative” relationships which is crucial in causal reason-
In-context causal relation identification and extrac- ing tasks.
tion. The first group of datasets used for assessing causal Commonsense knowledge: a necessary but not suffi-
reasoning capabilities consists of human-annotated causal cient condition for causal reasoning. Another commonly
relations. In tasks built on these datasets, a context of facts seengroupofdatasetsandtasksallowanddonotexcludethe
(such as real life events) or fantasy elements is provided. possibility of knowledge retrieval, for example, com2sense
Along with it, multiple choices of causal relations are pre- (Singhetal.2021),winowhy(Zhang,Zhao,andSong2020),
sentedtotheLLM,ortheLLMisaskedtoidentifyandselect tellmewhy (Lal et al. 2021), Neuropathic-pain-diagnosis (Tu
the cause or effect event from its provided context. et al. 2019; Tu, Ma, and Zhang 2023), moral permissibil-
Datasets along this line of research include MAVEN- ity, human organs senses, simple ethical questions, goal step
ERE, e-CARE, CausalTimeBank(Gao et al. 2023), wikihow (Zhang, Lyu, and Callison-Burch 2020), (Srivas-
EventStoryLine (Caselli and Vossen 2017; Gao et al. tava et al. 2022), intuive physics(Zecˇevic´ et al. 2023), ART
2023), Tuebingen cause-effect pairs dataset (Kıcıman et al. (Liu et al. 2023).
2023),COPA (Gordon, Kozareva, and Roemmele 2012), The motivation of these tasks is to test if LLMs have ac-
ChatGPT Causal Reasoning Evaluation, crass ai (Frohberg quired commonsense knowledge from everyday experience
and Binder 2021), causal judgment (Srivastava et al. and can draw sound, intuitive inferences like a human, and
2022),Causal Discovery (Causal Parrots), and Knowledge hence ground causal reasoning on commensense knowledge
Base Facts) (Zecˇevic´ et al. 2023). An example from (Gao (e.g., Figure 2 and 3). Note that in some tasks LLMs are
et al. 2023) is shown in Figure 1. not even provided with specific in-context data supporting
We argue here that performing well on such tasks does not the causal reasoning (e.g., in Tu, Ma, and Zhang (2023),
sufficiently demonstrate the causal reasoning ability of lan- no context is provided to ChatGPT before authors submit
guage models. One reason is the inherent design of the tasks queries), further indicating that LLMs are only performing
as multiple-choice. The LLMs are given limited options to knowledge retrieval, not causal reasoning in these tasks. We
choose from, sometimes only the two options ‘cause’ and believe that this is a necessary component of causal reason-
‘effect’. This lack of ‘open-endness’ restricts the evaluation ing, and that causal reasoning in humans likely relies on ap-
ofwhetherLLMscanidentifypossibilitiesinamoreabstract plied domain knowledge and accumulated experience. How-
sense. In other words, given that many of these datasets are ever, such tasks still do not demonstrate that LLMs have ac-
directly crafted from basic NLP tasks, by abusing the under- quired the abstraction and imagination skills that constitute
lying correlation structure of the data, such as calculating thehigherlevelsofourcausalhierarchies(Zhangetal.2023;
similarities between options and questions in a vector space Pearl and Mackenzie 2018) discussed in the Introduction.
(e.g., cause-effects pairs in Wang et al. (2022)), LLMs can
achieve good performance without actually doing any causal Contextual reasoning and graph-based tasks move
reasoning. If this is the case, the good performance could be towards more complex conceptions of causality
attributable to spurious language cues in the datasets, since In light of the problems mentioned above, different ap-
the underlying mechanism of identifying causal relation is proaches have emerged to evaluate LLMs in a way that
merely from the language used. Examples of simple word incorporates higher levels of causal reasoning. Recall that
replacements with less precise words in prompts (for exam- the hierarchy from Zhang et al. (2023) described Type 2
ple ‘pets’ instead of ‘cats’ in questions about food to be fed as “Discovering new knowledge from data” and Type 3
to the animal) led to a drop in performance (Li, Yu, and Et- as “Quantitatively estimating the consequences of actions”.
tinger 2022), contributing to this hypothesis. Meanwhile, Pearl and Mackenzie (2018) defined Rung 2
as “doing”—formalizing the concept of interventions, tra-
ditionally phrased in terms of do-calculus—and Rung 3 as
“imagining”—reasoning about alternative or counterfactual
scenarios, which may contradict what actually happened. In
this context, we therefore begin to see that a true causal
reasoning task should formalize the idea of interventional
and/or counterfactual reasoning, calling for the LLM to ap-
ply some level of abstraction or even imagination rather than
simple retrieval of domain knowledge.
Figure 1: An example of causal relation identification tasks.
Story-based contextual reasoning. Many tasks in this

creasing the length of the description.
The FCR task (Yang et al. 2022) presents a scaling of
complexity on multiple stages, where causal relations are
categorized as “enable, prevent and cause”. Three tasks are
embedded within it: 1) a binary classification task to pre-
dict whether a given text sequence contains a causal re-
lation; 2) a joint event extraction and fine-grained causal-
ity task for identifying text chunks describing the cause
and effect, respectively, and which fine-grained causality
category it belongs to, and 3) a question-answering task
with more challenging “why-questions” and “what-if ques-
tions”. Though some of these questions can likely still be
answered by knowledge retrieval, 2) and 3) move beyond
simple causal relation identification, demonstrating the idea
that a causally-capable LLM should be able to perform at
multiple levels of the causal hierarchy.
Simplificationsincausaldiscovery.Anotherapproachto
eliciting higher-level causal reasoning builds upon the use of
directed acyclic graph (DAG) models. Some tasks even at-
tempt to evaluate the ability of LLMs to return entire causal
graphs, as in Causal Discovery (Causal Parrots)(Zecˇevic´
etal.2023)andCorr2Cause(Jinetal.2023),theNeuropathic
pain dataset (Tu, Ma, and Zhang 2023), and the Arctic sea
ice dataset (Kıcıman et al. 2023).
Figure 2: Examples from com2sense (taken from Singh et al. The main idea behind Corr2Cause and CLadder is
(2021) and Srivastava et al. (2022)). causal graph discovery, aiming at inferring the graph struc-
ture from a series of conditional independence statements.
Corr2Cause technically meets all three ladders in the “ladder
ofcausation”,dealingwithinterventionsandcounterfactuals
as part of the algebraic graph structure. However, its use of
Figure 3: An example from intuitive physics (Zecˇevic´ et al.
letters as the basic ‘algebra’ is very different to a reasonable
2023).
real-world interpretation: one may argue that humans would
also fail to find causal relationships based purely on condi-
tional independence statements between even just a handful
group of datasets are about story-telling, such as Time- of variables without knowledge about the underlying algo-
Travel(Liu et al. 2023), FinCausal(Mariko et al. 2020), fan- rithm.
tasy reasoning(Srivastava et al. 2022), and minute mysteries
CLadder rectifies these concerns by shuffling through
qa (Srivastava et al. 2022).
real-world ‘stories’ and replacing the node letters with rele-
These tasks provide a more robust challenge for LLMs by vant nouns. To the best of our knowledge, CLadder is per-
increasing the underlying level of complexity, requiring the haps the most advanced causal benchmark available cur-
language model to evaluate a sequence of several events or rently, as it holistically tests the LLM’s ability to synthesize
statements,discardirrelevantormisleadinginformation,and several different components into a complex causal model,
ultimately synthesize multiple factors to reach a reasonable and then interprets the effects of interventions or changes
conclusion. An important innovation across several of these within that model. However, it is possible that CLadder’s
tasks is the use of non-informative or even fictional elements tasks still allow the LLM to use its pre-existing knowledge
to preclude the application of domain knowledge retrieval. to return a causal direction, potentially with this causal di-
Tasks such as minute mysteries qa (Srivastava et al. 2022) rection already being included in the training set. While hu-
tell a long-form story that with high probability does not ex- mans may not perform classical causal discovery algorithms
ist in the LLM’s pretraining dataset, while fantasy reasoning with numerical data, they may still perform more complex
(Srivastava et al. 2022) extend this even further by telling a reasoning than merely remembering the direction, e.g. per-
fantasy story set in a different universe. forming ‘intuitive’ experiments such as assessing the effect
One concern with these tasks is the entanglement of ‘tem- of increasing the altitude on temperature. In addition, merely
poral and spatial order” with causality in the sense that the adding “imagine a self-contained hypothetical world” to the
temporal or spatial order implies the causal relationship. The beginning of the prompt as done in CLadder does not imply
fact that LLMs are performing well on this task may not be an LLM will actually follow the instructions. Overall, this
surprising: if event B happens after event A, one may expect suggests that a causal benchmark entirely based on graph
LLMs to predict ‘A implies B’ option, even if the relation discovery of labelled nodes, while a useful and thoughtful
is just correlative. This is a common problem across many development,maynot fullyencapsulatethenecessary causal
of these datasets, but is not necessarily alleviated just by in- reasoning capabilities.

Finally, in the Tuebingen cause-effect pairs dataset of issue with current tasks is that they might include data that
Kıcıman et al. (2023), or the causal discovery task of is directly in the training set of LLMs. Indeed, experiments
Zecˇevic´ et al. (2023), edges are evaluated pair by pair in- (Kıcıman et al. 2023) have shown that GPT-3.5 and GPT-4
dependently. We believe that this might be inappropriate as memorised the Tu¨bingen cause-effect dataset, or a large por-
: 1) while humans might break down a full graph discovery tion of it (Mooij et al. 2016). Some papers rely on datasets
problem into problems of smaller graphs, they might still existing sinceseveral yearsago, such asthe neuropathic pain
be able to work with more than two variables at the same dataset (Tu et al. 2019; Tu, Ma, and Zhang 2023; Kıcıman
time, evaluating the direct and indirect causal relations ; 2) et al. 2023), where the chance of inclusion in the training
as further outlined in Kıcıman et al. (2023), if the DAG con- data is more likely.
tains the edges A → B → C, but not A → C, it is not This further reinforces the idea that in current literature,
clear whether the LLM should answer the individual ques- we cannot exclude the case that LLMs merely memorise
tion “Does A cause C?” as “Yes”, as A is indeed a cause of knowledge that can be directly or approximately be re-
C albeit indirectly, or “No”, as the DAG does not contain turned as answers to prompts on causal relationships, un-
the direct edge A → C. Asking for edges of A,B,C jointly derlining that the exclusion of (approximately) retrievable
would mitigate this issue. answers is paramount (Valmeekam et al. 2023). Further, re-
ports on newer versions of GPT obtained near-perfection
Many benchmarks suffer from key design issues performance on tasks from an earlier version of a paper (sec-
tion 4.1 of (Zecˇevic´ et al. 2023)), and one can simply not dis-
Unsuitable evaluation metrics. Although some tasks avoid
entangle whether these improvements are due to improve-
the above issues by prompting the LLM to explain causal
ments to the model (e.g. more parameters, better training
relationships (for example, the Causal Explanation Genera-
procedure etc.) or a memorisation of the relevant tasks. This
tion(CEG) task (Gao et al. 2023) which ask LLMs to gen-
suggests that LLMs should not be prompted with any pre-
erate explanations for causal relations between events (see
existing datasets except if one can guarantee that they have
Figure 4), the inappropriate design of an evaluation method
not been used in an LLM’s pretraining dataset.
can hurt the justification of causal reasoning capability of
Poor data quality in the design of datasets. We have
LLMs. In CEG, standard NLP evaluation metrics like n-
also observed examples of poor quality in some datasets.
grams or ROUGE-L (Wang et al. 2022; Gao et al. 2023), de-
For example, a task built on e-CARE(Gao et al. 2023) re-
signed for evaluating how similar the generated explanation
quires a model to choose a correct hypothesis for a given
is with the ‘ground truth’ explanation provided in the data,
premise from two candidates, so that the chosen hypothesis
are used to measure how ‘accurate’ the model-generated ex-
can form a valid causal conclusion with the premise. How-
planation is. However, to claim a generated explanation ac-
ever, as shown in Figure 6, there are examples where making
curately reveals causality does not necessarily mean that it
the right decision is even difficult for a human, since the op-
hastobesyntacticallysimilarwiththelabeledsentence.Two
tions are not well-crafted.
differentsentencesusingverydifferentwordsindifferentor-
der can still convey the same causal concept. Similar tasks
and datasets include CausalBank(Li et al. 2021), TimeTravel
(Liu et al. 2023). We also notice that some ‘ground truth’
explanations in these datasets seem to be incorrect as in e-
CARE(seeforinstanceFigure5).Howtoappropriatelygen-
erate accurate causal explanations and evaluate them at large
Figure 6: Examples from e-CARE of poor data quality.
scale is an open research question.
Further, to the best of our understanding, the Forecasting
Subquestions task of BigBench evaluates the log-probability
assigned by human-generated questions that can be related
as ‘causes” or preliminary subquestions to another given
Figure 4: An example from CEG task. question where higher is better, but does not contain sub-
questions that are not causes of the question, where lower
is better. This prevents the assessment whether the subques-
tion is merely taking place before the question without any
causal relationship or is causally related to it.
Datasets and tasks that are not for causality. It is
also of concern that some datasets are, in our opinion, not
even related to causal reasoning even though they are la-
beled so. Some datasets are directly crafted from NLP tasks
Figure 5: Examples of incorrect ground-truth explanations
for assessing LLM language understanding. For example,
in e-CARE.
the BIGbench entailed polarity (Karttunen 2012; Srivastava
et al. 2022) task evaluates an LLM’s ability to detect en-
Inclusion of datasets or tasks in the training set. Sim- tailed polarities from implicative verbs, as shown in Figure
ilar to the commonsense knowledge retrieval issue, another 7. This is by no means a causal reasoning task. In (Yang

et al. 2022), LogiQA, Dream, RACE are also referred to as Causal reasoning as needed for Type 2 and Type 3 ques-
causal reasoning datasets, but we believe they are targeted tions in Zhang et al. (2023) requires the ability to handle
at evaluating language understanding as they seem to assess complex and possibly intersecting factors, but many exist-
reading comprehension rather than deduction of causal rela- ing benchmarks only ask simple one-step questions (Sri-
tionships. vastava et al. 2022; Gao et al. 2023). Benchmarks require
multi-factor scalability. They should be able to introduce
one, two, or several additional factors and see how perfor-
mance changes as complications are added, evaluating the
scaling behavior of LLMs. If a machine truly learns algo-
rithms to understand causal relations, adding one more vari-
able should not make any difference, at least within certain
bounds of model capacity. We note the causal chains and
natural word chain tasks of Zecˇevic´ et al. (2023) as a posi-
Figure 7: Examples in Bigbench entailed polarity. tive example to this end.
Lastly, and perhaps most importantly, a pressing con-
cern is that tasks rooted in real-world scenarios or contexts
Some other datasets in BigBench, like the speech detec-
allow for retrieval rather than reasoning. This applies to
tion dataset (assessing whether a given figure of speech is
any dataset for which we cannot exclude that its underly-
a simile, metaphor, pun, etc.),cause and effect, Indic cause
ing causal structure has been (approximately) observed in
and effect (Srivastava et al. 2022) (mainly assessing lan-
the pretraining dataset of an LLM. Numerous benchmarks
guage translation), are assessing language understanding
prompt an LLM with a story and then ask for its logical
rather than causal reasoning. We believe that these datasets
consequences (Srivastava et al. 2022; Gao et al. 2023). For
are inadequate for evaluating causal reasoning and should
example, “if it’s sunny in the morning and I forget my um-
hence be excluded for this purpose.
brella, what will happen if it rains in the afternoon?” (more
examples can be found in fantasy reasoning(Srivastava et al.
Conclusion and future work
2022)). The issue here is that the LLM does not need to ac-
We believe that building a reliable and robust assessment tually reason at all: it can simply access its training dataset,
framework for causal reasoning with LLMs is timely and which contains millions of stories about weather and um-
important. In this work, we collected and reviewed existing brellas, and approximately retrieve a response (Valmeekam
datasets and tasks, and pointed out issues of certain datasets et al. 2022). Of course, humans also access their memory
in light of the three types of causal capabilities (Zhang when answering questions like this, but we would be equally
et al. 2023) and the ladder of causation(Pearl and Macken- capable of answering a similar question with fictional or
zie 2018). We highlight promising recent trends that present non-informativecontextpurelybyreasoningcausally.Toac-
a more satisfactory and holistic evaluation of causal rea- curately gauge human-level causal reasoning, a benchmark
soning. Ultimately, following the model of the widely pop- task must therefore not allow for memory retrieval, out-
ular General Language Understanding Evaluation (GLUE) ruling the possibility that an answer has been approximately
framework (Wang et al. 2018) for general NLP evaluation, seen in the pretraining data.
this work is a step towards the creation of a Causal Language We conclude with the following four criteria. We argue
Understanding Evalution (CLUE) framework, consisting of that not all of these criteria are ‘necessary’, but they are
a minimal but exhaustive set of tasks that an LLM should at least desirable to better demonstrate the causal reasoning
be able to complete in order to be considered successful at capibility of LLMs:
causal reasoning. 1. Causal rather than correlative: The benchmark should
Synthesizing across simpler and more complex tasks, we be carefully designed in causal language, to reveal
note key commonalities that we believe a good benchmark causal, not correlative relations dealing with directional
or set of benchmarks should possess. First, in the context interventions and/or counterfactuals.
of the (Zhang et al. 2023) and (Pearl and Mackenzie 2018)
2. Open-ended: The benchmark should allow LLMs to
hierarchies, we argue that an effective benchmark must deal
cover as many causal reasoning possibilities as possible,
with interventions and/or counterfactuals, being phrased
rather than providing a fixed set list of options.
in causal rather than merely correlative language.
3. Scalable: Rather than simple one-step questions, the
In addition, good performance of LLMs on existing tasks
benchmark should introduce multiple factors, allowing
may be accounted to their remarkable data-processing and
to gradually increase its complexity while following the
retrieval capabilities using billions of parameters as opposed
same causal structure.
to their causal reasoning capabilities (Kaddour et al. 2023).
4. Non-retrievable: The benchmark should be phrased
Some tasks offer multiple-choice answers to the LLM (Gao
with non-informative or fictional context, such that an-
et al. 2023; Gordon, Kozareva, and Roemmele 2012; Srivas-
swers cannot simply be looked up.
tava et al. 2022), but this can enable the model to simply
calculate a measure of similarity between the options and We hope that this review can draw the attention of
the initial premise. A good benchmark should therefore be researchers to the pressing need of constructing suitable
open-ended rather than multiple choice. datasets for causal reasoning and inference with LLMs.

Acknowledgments Liu, X.; Yin, D.; Zhang, C.; Feng, Y.; and Zhao, D. 2023.
We thank our anonymous reviewers for useful comments The Magic of IF: Investigating Causal Reasoning Abili-
which helped us improve the manuscript. L.Y. is supported ties in Large Language Models of Code. arXiv preprint
by the EPSRC Centre for Doctoral Training in Modern arXiv:2305.19213.
Statistics and Statistical Machine Learning (EP/S023151/1) Mariko, D.; Akl, H. A.; Labidurie, E.; Durfort, S.;
and Novartis. V.S. and O.C. are supported by the EPSRC De Mazancourt, H.; and El-Haj, M. 2020. Financial docu-
Centre for Doctoral Training in Modern Statistics and Statis- ment causality detection shared task (fincausal 2020). arXiv
tical Machine Learning (EP/S023151/1) and Novo Nordisk. preprint arXiv:2012.02505.
F. F. acknowledges the receipt of a studentship award from
Mooij, J. M.; Peters, J.; Janzing, D.; Zscheischler, J.; and
the Health Data Research UK-The Alan Turing Institute Scho¨lkopf, B. 2016. Distinguishing cause from effect using
Wellcome PhD Programme (Grant Ref: 218529/Z/19/Z). observational data: methods and benchmarks. The Journal
of Machine Learning Research, 17(1): 1103–1204.
References
Pearl, J.; and Mackenzie, D. 2018. The book of why: the new
Caselli, T.; and Vossen, P. 2017. The event storyline corpus: science of cause and effect. Basic books.
A new benchmark for causal and temporal relation extrac-
Singh, S.; Wen, N.; Hou, Y.; Alipoormolabashi, P.; Wu, T.-
tion. In Proceedings of the Events and Stories in the News
L.; Ma, X.; and Peng, N. 2021. COM2SENSE: A common-
Workshop, 77–86.
sense reasoning benchmark with complementary sentences.
Frohberg, J.; and Binder, F. 2021. Crass: A novel data set
arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.00969.
and benchmark to test counterfactual reasoning of large lan-
Srivastava, A.; Rastogi, A.; Rao, A.; Shoeb, A. A. M.; Abid,
guage models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.11941.
A.;Fisch,A.;Brown,A.R.;Santoro,A.;Gupta,A.;Garriga-
Gao, J.; Ding, X.; Qin, B.; and Liu, T. 2023. Is Chat-
Alonso, A.; et al. 2022. Beyond the imitation game: Quanti-
GPT a Good Causal Reasoner? A Comprehensive Evalua-
fying and extrapolating the capabilities of language models.
tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.07375.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.04615.
Gordon, A.; Kozareva, Z.; and Roemmele, M. 2012.
Tu, R.; Ma, C.; and Zhang, C. 2023. Causal-discovery per-
SemEval-2012 task 7: Choice of plausible alternatives: An
formance of chatgpt in the context of neuropathic pain diag-
evaluation of commonsense causal reasoning. In * SEM
nosis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.13819.
2012: The First Joint Conference on Lexical and Computa-
tional Semantics–Volume 1: Proceedings of the main confer- Tu, R.; Zhang, K.; Bertilson, B.; Kjellstrom, H.; and Zhang,
ence and the shared task, and Volume 2: Proceedings of the C. 2019. Neuropathic pain diagnosis simulator for causal
Sixth International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (Se- discovery algorithm evaluation. Advances in Neural Infor-
mEval 2012), 394–398. mation Processing Systems, 32.
Jin, Z.; Liu, J.; Lyu, Z.; Poff, S.; Sachan, M.; Mihalcea, R.; Valmeekam, K.; Marquez, M.; Olmo, A.; Sreedharan, S.;
Diab, M.; and Scho¨lkopf, B. 2023. Can Large Language and Kambhampati, S. 2023. PlanBench: An Extensible
Models Infer Causation from Correlation? arXiv preprint Benchmark for Evaluating Large Language Models on Plan-
arXiv:2306.05836. ning and Reasoning about Change. In Thirty-seventh Con-
ference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets
Kaddour, J.; Harris, J.; Mozes, M.; Bradley, H.; Raileanu,
and Benchmarks Track.
R.; and McHardy, R. 2023. Challenges and applications of
large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.10169. Valmeekam, K.; Olmo, A.; Sreedharan, S.; and Kambham-
pati, S. 2022. Large Language Models Still Can’t Plan
Karttunen, L. 2012. Simple and phrasal implicatives. In *
(A Benchmark for LLMs on Planning and Reasoning about
SEM 2012: The First Joint Conference on Lexical and Com-
Change). arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.10498.
putational Semantics–Volume 1: Proceedings of the main
conference and the shared task, and Volume 2: Proceedings Wang, A.; Singh, A.; Michael, J.; Hill, F.; Levy, O.; and
of the Sixth International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation Bowman, S. R. 2018. GLUE: A multi-task benchmark and
(SemEval 2012), 124–131. analysis platform for natural language understanding. arXiv
Kıcıman, E.; Ness, R.; Sharma, A.; and Tan, C. 2023. Causal preprint arXiv:1804.07461.
reasoning and large language models: Opening a new fron- Wang, Y.; Mishra, S.; Alipoormolabashi, P.; Kordi, Y.;
tier for causality. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.00050. Mirzaei, A.; Arunkumar, A.; Ashok, A.; Dhanasekaran,
Lal, Y. K.; Chambers, N.; Mooney, R.; and Balasubrama- A. S.; Naik, A.; Stap, D.; et al. 2022. Super-
nian, N. 2021. Tellmewhy: A dataset for answering why- naturalinstructions: Generalization via declarative instruc-
questions in narratives. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.06132. tions on 1600+ nlp tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.07705.
Li, J.; Yu, L.; and Ettinger, A. 2022. Counterfactual reason- Yang, L.; Wang, Z.; Wu, Y.; Yang, J.; and Zhang, Y.
ing: Do Language Models need world knowledge for causal 2022. Towards fine-grained causal reasoning and qa. arXiv
inference? In NeurIPS 2022 Workshop on Neuro Causal and preprint arXiv:2204.07408.
Symbolic AI (nCSI). Zecˇevic´, M.; Willig, M.; Dhami, D. S.; and Kerst-
Li, Z.; Ding, X.; Liu, T.; Hu, J. E.; and Van Durme, B. ing, K. 2023. Causal parrots: Large language models
2021. Guided generation of cause and effect. arXiv preprint may talk causality but are not causal. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2107.09846. arXiv:2308.13067.

Zhang, C.; Bauer, S.; Bennett, P.; Gao, J.; Gong, W.;
Hilmkil, A.; Jennings, J.; Ma, C.; Minka, T.; Pawlowski,
N.; et al. 2023. Understanding causality with large lan-
guage models: Feasibility and opportunities. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2304.05524.
Zhang, H.; Zhao, X.; and Song, Y. 2020. WinoWhy: A
deep diagnosis of essential commonsense knowledge for
answering Winograd schema challenge. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2005.05763.
Zhang, L.; Lyu, Q.; and Callison-Burch, C. 2020. Reason-
ingaboutgoals,steps,andtemporalorderingwithWikiHow.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.07690.