CROP: Token-Efficient Reasoning in Large Language Models via
Regularized Prompt Optimization
Deep Shah1, Sanket Badhe1, Nehal Kathrotia1, Priyanka Tiwari2
1Google LLC, 2Purdue University
Abstract et al., 2026). This paradigm encourages models to
mimic structured human deliberation (Yao et al.,
Large Language Models utilizing reasoning
2023; Besta et al., 2024). Consequently, step-by-
techniques improve task performance but in-
step rationale generation has become the standard
cur significant latency and token costs due to
verbose generation. Existing automatic prompt operational mode for extracting high-fidelity rea-
optimization(APO) frameworks target task ac- soning from large-scale foundation models (Light-
curacy exclusively at the expense of generat- man et al., 2024).
ing long reasoning traces. We propose Cost- Despite these performance gains, the reliance on
Regularized Optimization of Prompts (CROP),
verbose intermediate reasoning introduces a criti-
an APO method that introduces regularization
cal deployment hurdle for real-world production
on response length by generating textual feed-
environments. The generation of thousands of in-
back in addition to standard accuracy feed-
termediate tokens incurs massive inference latency
back. This forces the optimization process to
produce prompts that elicit concise responses and exorbitant financial costs (Pope et al., 2022;
containing only critical information and rea- Aminabadi et al., 2022; Kwon et al., 2023). Recent
soning. We evaluate our approach on com- empirical analyses reveal that modern reasoning
plex reasoning datasets, specifically GSM8K, models exhibit substantial verbosity compensation,
LogiQA and BIG-Bench Hard. We achieved
often producing excessively lengthy explanations
an 80.6% reduction in token consumption
that provide little additional logical value (Patel
while maintaining competitive accuracy, seeing
et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2025b). This extensive token
only a nominal decline in performance. This
presents a pragmatic solution for deploying consumption thus presents a severe liability that re-
token-efficient and cost-effective agentic AI stricts the practical viability of deploying complex
systems in production pipelines. reasoning pipelines (Renze and Guven, 2024; Li
et al., 2024; Jiang et al., 2023).
1 Introduction
To optimize these systems, the field has in-
Large Language Models (LLMs) have achieved creasingly adopted automated prompt engineer-
unprecedented state-of-the-art capabilities in com- ing frameworks that leverage LLMs as meta-
plex reasoning tasks primarily through step-by- optimizers (Zhou et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2024;
step generation strategies like Chain of Thought Pryzant et al., 2023). Tools such as DSPy remove
(Wei et al., 2022; Kojima et al., 2022; Wang et al., the need for manual human trial and error by re-
2023b). By prompting models to decompose intri- fining prompts through systematic search (Khat-
cate problems into intermediate logical steps prior tab et al., 2024). Recent frameworks extend this
to outputting a final answer, researchers have sig- paradigm by automating the optimization work-
nificantly improved performance across mathemat- flow, utilizing meta-learning and combinatorial
ical, logical, and commonsense reasoning bench- search to systematically refine instructions and
marks (Nye et al., 2021; Zelikman et al., 2022; prompting strategies without human intervention
Cobbe et al., 2021). Reasoning capabilities are an (Spiess et al., 2025; Murthy et al., 2025; Xu et al.,
indispensable requirement for deploying founda- 2025a). However, these existing tools suffer from
tion models across diverse and critical domains, a critical flaw in that they optimize almost exclu-
including financial analysis, algorithmic ranking, sively for task accuracy, often at the expense of
medical diagnosis, and legal reasoning (Wu et al., generating excessively verbose intermediate rea-
2023; Cui et al., 2023; Badhe et al., 2026; Shah soning traces. By continuously adding edge-case
1
6202
rpA
8
]LC.sc[
1v41241.4062:viXra

instructions and logic corrections to the prompt, the 1.1 Main Contributions
optimizer inadvertently maximizes the verbosity
In summary, our primary contributions are as fol-
tax, producing bloated system prompts that force
lows:
the target model to generate even longer and more
• Cost-Aware Prompt Optimization (CROP):
exhaustive reasoning traces.
We propose CROP, a novel token-efficient
This inherent tendency toward verbosity exposes automatic prompt optimization framework.
a fundamental missing mathematical constraint By introducing an response adaptive textual
in the current paradigm of textual optimization. length penalty, CROP successfully decouples
In standard machine learning optimization, loss reasoning accuracy from generation verbosity
functions routinely incorporate regularization tech- during the prompt discovery phase.
niques (such as L1 or L2 penalties) to constrain
• Massive Inference Efficiency: We empir-
model weights and prevent overly complex archi-
ically demonstrate that CROP reduces out-
tectures from overfitting (Goodfellow et al., 2016;
put token consumption by up to 80.6% on
Bishop and Nasrabadi, 2006). Yet, textual prompt
complex reasoning benchmarks (GSM8K,
optimization lacks a true analog to a length penalty.
LogiQA and BIG-Bench Hard) while strictly
To solve this structural deficiency, we propose preserving the task accuracy of unconstrained
CROP, an applied methodology that introduces an Chain-of-Thought prompting.
output-biased textual regularizer directly into the
• Autonomous Discovery of Symbolic Rea-
prompt optimization loop. CROP builds upon the
soning: We show that our regularized tex-
multi-objective capabilities of textual differentia-
tual gradients automatically force the target
tion to treat output token count as a first-class op-
LLM to adopt highly compressed, symbolic
timization constraint alongside task accuracy. By
reasoning structures. This emergent behav-
computing a continuous length-penalty gradient
ior conceptually mirrors human-engineered
that functions independently of the task loss, the
strategies (e.g., “Chain-of-Draft”) without re-
regularizer explicitly penalizes the target model
quiring manual prompt design.
whenever its output exceeds a minimal thresh-
old. This feedback is then aggregated with tradi- 2 Related Work
tional accuracy gradients using textual summation.
2.1 Automatic Prompt Optimization
Consequently, CROP forces the meta-optimizer to
The optimization of natural language prompts has
rewrite system instructions that explicitly constrain
evolved from discrete vocabulary search (Shin
verbosity without sacrificing the underlying logical
et al., 2020; Deng et al., 2022; Prasad et al., 2023;
steps necessary for correct inference.
Guo et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2024; Badhe and
Through this regularized feedback mechanism, Shah, 2026) to utilizing large language models as
CROP successfully forces the discovery of con- meta-optimizers (Zhou et al., 2023; Yang et al.,
cise reasoning paths. Our empirical evaluations 2024; Pryzant et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023a).
demonstrate that this approach effectively shrinks Frameworks such as DSPy and TextGrad (Khat-
the output distribution, minimizing both output tab et al., 2024; Yuksekgonul et al., 2024) have
length and overall inference latency. We evaluate formalized this into comprehensive computation
CROP on complex reasoning benchmarks, specifi- graphs, enabling automated textual backpropaga-
cally GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021), LogiQA (Liu tion capable of optimizing user-defined metrics
et al., 2020), and BIG-Bench Hard (Suzgun et al., and rewards. However, when applied to complex
2023; Srivastava et al., 2023). The results show reasoning tasks, textual optimization exposes a fun-
that our cost-aware optimization method yields a damental generative bias: because evaluators di-
dramatic reduction in output token consumption agnose logic errors via natural language critiques,
by 80.6% reduction in token consumption while they inherently resolve failures by prescribing ad-
maintaining competitive accuracy. By establishing ditive logic and expanded instructions. This ac-
a continuous textual penalty for verbosity, CROP cumulation of instructional leads to unchecked in-
provides a pragmatic and highly effective solution crease of reasoning leading to verbosity. Recog-
for deploying token-efficient compound AI sys- nizing this computational bottleneck, recent frame-
tems in strict production pipelines. works such as Promptomatix and AutoPDL (Pan
2

et al., 2025; Murthy et al., 2025) have introduced static prompting remains notoriously brittle, while
cost-aware objectives to balance efficiency with dynamic token-pruning and step-skipping often re-
performance, alongside discrete evolutionary algo- quire specialized decoding mechanisms or architec-
rithms like CAPO and ParetoPrompt (Wen, 2025; tural interventions. Unlike approaches that demand
Authors, 2025; Zehle et al., 2025). Building upon expensive weight updates, custom decoding algo-
this critical shift, CROP introduces a continuous, rithms, or fragile hardcoded constraints, CROP
dual-objective textual optimization landscape. By operates entirely in the natural language optimiza-
applying an unconditional, output-biased regular- tion space. It dynamically modulates verbosity at
izer alongside task gradients, CROP exerts continu- the prompt level, systematically discovering opti-
ous downward pressure on token bloat, forcing the mal, token-efficient reasoning pathways through
meta-optimizer to systematically balance logical regularized textual feedback.
correctness with generative brevity in a way that
3 Methodology
purely additive textual gradients cannot.
In this section, we formalize CROP, a framework
2.2 Inference-Time Scaling and
that extends the automatic prompt optimization
Self-Correction
(APO) paradigm to resource-constrained environ-
Alternative approaches improve reasoning by ments. We first briefly review the preliminary
scaling compute during inference. Methodolo- formulation of textual differentiation, and subse-
gies ranging from Self-Consistency (Wang et al., quently detail our novel textual regularization ob-
2023b) to iterative self-correction frameworks like jective.
Reflexion and Self-Refine (Shinn et al., 2023;
3.1 Preliminaries: Textual Differentiation
Madaan et al., 2023) allow models to critique and
repeatedly refine their intermediate outputs. While Let V∗ denote the space of all possible natural
yielding substantial accuracy gains, these pipelines language strings. In a standard LLM-based compu-
inherently multiply the token consumption and la- tation graph, we define a system prompt p ∈ V∗ as
tency of the system with every additional trial. In a learnable parameter, an input query x ∈ V∗, and
contrast to these methods that severely compound a target model M. The forward pass generates an
inference overhead, CROP shifts the iterative re- output yˆ = M(x;p).
finement burden entirely to an offline prompt op- Given a ground-truth label y, a textual loss func-
timization phase, ultimately producing a single, tion L evaluates the prediction. Instead of
task
highly efficient system prompt that elicits com- yielding a scalar gradient, textual backpropagation
pressed reasoning trajectories in a single forward queries a secondary evaluator LLM E, to generate
pass. a textual gradient g ∈ V∗. This gradient is a
task
natural language critique detailing the logical flaws
2.3 Cost-Aware Systems and Verbosity
in yˆ and suggesting semantic updates to p:
Control
g = E (p,x,yˆ,y) (1)
To mitigate computational overhead (Pope et al., task task
2022; Kwon et al., 2023), researchers have devel- An optimizer LLM, O, then acts as the parameter
oped system-level routing protocols (Chen et al., update function, synthesizing the batch of gradi-
2023; Ong et al., 2024; Aggarwal et al., 2024; Jian ents to perform a discrete step in the prompt space:
et al., 2023), and inference-time early exiting or p = O(p ,{g(i) }B ), where B is the batch
t+1 t task i=1
truncation strategies (Mao et al., 2025; Jiang et al., size.
2023; Wu et al., 2025). Furthermore, recent litera-
3.2 Verbose Reasoning
ture focuses on explicitly compressing reasoning
traces via continuous latent projections (Hao et al., While L effectively maximizes reasoning ac-
task
2024; Shen et al., 2025; Wei et al., 2025), con- curacy, it is agnostic to computational efficiency.
ditioned textual pruning (Kang et al., 2024; Xia, Consequently, the meta-optimizer O inherently
2025; Wang, 2025). However, these approaches gravitates toward system prompts that trigger use-
introduce severe operational trade-offs. Methods ful but overly verbose Chain-of-Thought (CoT)
relying on continuous latent projections or explicit bloat in yˆ. In production systems, the length of yˆ
fine-tuning are computationally prohibitive and directly influences the inference latency and com-
alter foundation weights. Conversely, structured pute requirements.
3

ı
GroundTruth
Dataset
(D)
ƒ Accuracy
TargetResponse Gradient(gtask)
p
.
ri
.
c
.
e
E
,
v
w
er
h
y
ic
s
h
ec
is
on
0
d
.6
g
×
las
$
s
5
co
=
sts
$3
6
.
0%
Ky
o
la
f
r
th
w
e
ants
PredictedAnswer Task
(E
E
t
v
as
a
k
l
)
uator
(cid:212)
_ C T h h a o i u n gh o t f j t in o to bu p y ai 1 rs 6 . g T la h s e s r e e s. w W ill e be ca 1 n 6 g / r 2 ou = pt 8 he pa g i l r a s s . ses Meta-Optimizer
SystemPrompt TargetLLM Eachpairconsistsofoneglassat$5and (O)
(p) (M) a
$
n
5
o
+
the
$
r
3
a
=
t$
$
3
8
.
.
T
T
h
h
e
e
c
t
o
o
s
t
t
al
o
c
f
o
e
s
a
t
ch
for
pa
8
ir
p
i
a
s
irsis
œ1.TaskAccuracy
8×$8=$64. ... if |yˆ|>τ œ2.OutputCompression
Correct¥ BrevityEvaluator
(Ereg) G R r e a g d u i l e a n r t iz ( a g t r i e o g n )
DiscretePromptUpdate(pt+1)
Figure 1: Overview of CROP optimization pipeline. A meta-optimizer updates the system prompt by aggregating
textual gradients for both task accuracy (g ) and response brevity (g ), systematically enforcing token-efficient
task reg
reasoning.
3.3 Textual Regularization task gradients and regularization gradients and per-
forms the update step p = O(p ,g ).
CROP applies L across the entire batch, assert- t+1 t total
reg
Rather than naively returning the prompt from
ing a constant downward pressure on token con-
the final iteration, CROP employs a structured se-
sumption. We define a secondary evaluator prompt,
lection criterion to identify the optimal prompt
E , which receives the generated output and com-
reg
p∗ discovered during the optimization trajectory.
putes a textual brevity gradient:
We define a composite score S for each candidate
g reg = E reg (p,yˆ) (2) prompt:
The resulting gradient g explicitly instructs
reg S(p) = Accuracy(p) − λ · L (p) (4)
the optimizer to inject brevity constraints into p. norm
The regularization gradient is computed only when
where L (p) represents the generated token
norm
∥yˆ∥ exceeds a predefined threshold, preventing the
count normalized by the average COT output token
penalization of already token-efficient reasoning.
length, and λ is a tunable regularization coefficient.
To maintain optimization stability and prevent de-
The magnitude of λ dictates the explicit trade-off
structively large steps in the prompt space—which
between task performance and token consumption.
frequently induce catastrophic forgetting of the un-
We selected λ through an empirical grid search on
derlying logic—E is constrained to enforce only
reg the validation set over the range of 0.01 to 0.5. We
a gradual, incremental reduction in output length
identified λ = 0.2 as the optimal configuration, as
per iteration. Furthermore, the evaluator is explic-
it provided the maximum reduction in reasoning
itly directed to target peripheral narrative elements
verbosity without inducing a statistically signifi-
and conversational filler, strictly preserving the to-
cant degradation in task accuracy.
kens associated with critical computational steps.
4 Experiment Setup
3.4 Gradient Aggregation and
Multi-Objective Optimize 4.1 Model Setup
To perform the parameter update, CROP treats We assign specific Large Language Models to the
prompt optimization as a formal multi-objective distinct roles of evaluation, optimization, and in-
problem. We leverage the concatenation proper- ference. We utilize Gemini 2.0 Flash as the dual-
ties of textual autograd engines to compute the evaluator (E and E ) to compute task accuracy
task reg
total gradient. For a single instance, the combined critiques and regularized verbosity gradients. For
textual gradient g is defined via the string con- the parameter update step, we deploy Gemini 3.1
total
catenation operator ⊕: Pro (with Thinking enabled) as the meta-optimizer
(O). A high-capacity model is critical here, as syn-
g = g ⊕ “\n” ⊕ g (3)
total task reg
thesizing multi-objective, conflicting textual gradi-
During the batched optimization step, the meta- ents requires an extended context window and ad-
optimizer O receives the aggregated sets of both vanced deductive reasoning (ablated in Section 5).
4

Algorithm 1 CROP: Cost-Regularized Optimiza- Prohibits intermediate reasoning steps to out-
tion of Prompts put the final answer directly. This establishes
Require: Initial system prompt p , Target LLM our empirical lower bound for token consump-
0
M, Meta-Optimizer LLM O tion, though typically at the severe expense of
Require: Task Evaluator E , Brevity Evaluator task accuracy.
task
E
reg
• Chain-of-Thought (CoT): Appends a stan-
Require: Dataset D, Batch size B, Max iterations
dard step-by-step reasoning directive. This
T
serves as our upper bound for baseline accu-
1: p ← p 0 racy, simultaneously representing the widely
2: for t = 1 to T do
used but verbosity prompting technique.
3: Sample batch {(x i ,y i )}B i=1 ∼ D
4: G batch ← ∅ ▷ Initialize empty batch • Conciseness inducing prompts: We used
gradient list different prompts which encourages concise
5: for i = 1 to B do reasoning via prompting (Lee et al., 2025).
6: yˆ i ← M(x i ;p) ▷ Forward Pass (See prompts in Appendix A.1)
7: g t ( a i s ) k ← E task (p,x i ,yˆ i ,y i ) ▷ Compute • TextGrad: An automatic prompt optimiza-
Task Accuracy Gradient
tion framework that utilizes textual gradients
8: g r ( e i g ) ← E reg (p,yˆ i ) ▷ Compute Textual to maximize task accuracy without penaliz-
Regularization Gradient
ing verbose reasoning during the optimization
9: g t ( o i t ) al ← g t ( a i s ) k ⊕ “\n” ⊕ g r ( e i g ) ▷ loop.
Aggregate Gradients via Concatenation
10: G batch ← G batch ∪ {g t ( o i t ) al } 4.3 Datasets
11: end for
To evaluate CROP across diverse cognitive do-
12: Accuracy t ← C correct /B mains, we selected three challenging reasoning
13: AvgLength t ← L total /B benchmarks. Because these tasks inherently ne-
14: S t ← Accuracy t − λ · L norm (t) ▷ cessitate intermediate logic, they intrinsically in-
Evaluate trade-off score
centivize unconstrained LLMs to generate highly
15: if S t > S best then ▷ Update best prompt if verbose Chain-of-Thought (CoT) traces, providing
score improves
an optimal testbed for our compression framework.
16: S best ← S t To prevent data leakage, we utilize the official train,
17: p∗ ← p
validation, and test splits provided by the dataset
18: end if
authors wherever available. For the BBH Object
19: p ← O(p,G batch ) ▷ Meta-Optimizer Counting task, which lacks standard splits, we man-
computes discrete prompt update
ually partition the data into a 25/25/50 split for
20: end for
training, validation, and testing, respectively.
21: return p∗ ▷ Optimized token-efficient prompt
• GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021): A benchmark
of linguistically diverse grade-school math
For forward-pass inference (M), we evaluated word problems. This dataset requires accu-
two models: Gemini 2.0 Flash and Qwen 2.5 7B. rate multi-step arithmetic reasoning, which
frequently induces unconstrained LLMs to
4.2 Baselines
produce excessively long textual explanations
We benchmark CROP against zero-shot prompting, for basic algebraic steps.
chain-of-thoughts, concise induced prompting and
• Object Counting (BIG-Bench Hard) (Suz-
automatic prompt optimization method TextGrad.
gun et al., 2023): An algorithmic reasoning
We intentionally omit static length-constrained
task requiring the model to determine the to-
prompts, which are brittle and degrade reasoning;
tal count of a specific semantic class from
furthermore, the model was unable to follow ex-
a natural-language collection of items. This
plicit token-limit instructions and frequently ex-
tests symbolic tracking, where standard CoT
ceeded the given limits.
prompts typically trigger exhaustive, token-
• Standard Zero-Shot (Direct Prompting): heavy item enumeration.
5

Figure 2: Performance and efficiency comparison across three datasets using the Gemini 2.0 Flash model.
• LogiQA (Liu et al., 2020): A challeng- Qualitative comparison of generated reasoning traces
on the GSM8K dataset.
ing machine reading comprehension dataset
sourced from expert logical examinations. It Input Query: Kylar went to the store to buy glasses for
his new apartment. One glass costs $5, but every second
requires complex deductive inference (e.g.,
glass costs only 60% of the price. Kylar wants to buy 16
categorical, conditional, and disjunctive rea- glasses. How much does he need to pay for them?
soning), assessing CROP’s ability to maintain
the structural integrity of formal logical argu- 1. Direct Prompting (No Reasoning)
68
ments under aggressive token compression.
✗ Incorrect
2. Chain-of-Thought (Standard Verbosity)
Method Core Instruction Let the cost of one glass be $5. Every second glass costs
60% of the price, which is 0.6 * $5 = $3. Kylar wants
No Reason- Output ONLY the final answer to buy 16 glasses. We can group the glasses into pairs.
There will be 16 / 2 = 8 pairs. Each pair consists of one
ing without reasoning or thinking.
glass at $5 and another at $3. The cost of each pair is $5
+ $3 = $8. The total cost for 8 pairs is 8 * $8 = $64.
Chain-of- Think step by step.
Thought ✓ Correct (128 tokens)
CROP [...] concisely, showing the 3. CROP (Ours Compressed Reasoning)
8 * 5 + 8 * (5 * 0.6) = 40 + 8 * 3 = 40 + 24 = 64
(Ours) combined essential calculations
leading directly to the final nu- ✓ Correct (44 tokens)
merical answer. Omit interme-
diate labels. Focus on chained
Table 2: Reasoning comparison on the GSM8K dataset.
calculations.
Table 1: Comparison of core system instructions across consumption by up to 80.6% without degrading
prompting baselines for the GSM8K dataset. Standard exact-match accuracy. These results establish that
prefix formulations and output formatting constraints high-fidelity inference can be sustained at a frac-
have been omitted to highlight the distinct reasoning
tion of the standard computational cost.
directives.
5.1 Significant Reductions in Token
Consumption
5 Results and Analysis
CROP consistently achieved state-of-the-art token
We evaluate CROP’s capacity to eliminate the com- efficiency while preserving the logical integrity
putational redundancy inherent in unconstrained required for complex problem-solving. On math-
Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reasoning. By integrating ematical arithmetic (GSM8K), algorithmic tasks
a continuous brevity gradient into the optimization (Object Counting), and LogiQA, the framework re-
loop, CROP explicitly optimizes for reasoning den- duced output token consumption by 74.8%, 80.6%,
sity alongside task performance. As detailed in and 66.5% respectively while retaining reasoning
Table 3, our framework compresses output token leading to comparable accuracy for Gemini 2.0
6

Table 3: Model Performance Across Prompting Methods. Cells display Accuracy (%) with Average Token Count
in parentheses.
Model Dataset CoT w/oReasoning CROP TextGrad BeConcise OnlyNumber UseAbbrev
GSM8K 95.3(198.4) 51.2(9.2) 93.4(50.0) 95.5(185.5) 96.2(120.8) 91.4(113.0) 95.1(145.7)
Gemini2Flash CountObject 96.0(101.2) 66.4(9.4) 94.8(19.6) 90.5(24.5) 96.0(59.0) 92.5(55.0) 95.0(92.0)
LogiQA 65.2(540.5) 60.4(5.1) 64.2(181.0) 66.4(663.0) 65.1(301.0) 61.9(423.0) 65.3(422.0)
GSM8K 90.2(123.4) 54.9(3.4) 87.8(21.3) 89.8(101.2) 90.4(82.3) 85.1(31.1) 88.2(72.4)
Qwen2.57B CountObject 92.1(56.3) 67.8(3.8) 90.1(12.1) 88.8(32.7) 92.7(46.6) 81.5(16.2) 90.2(39.7)
LogiQA 61.2(287.0) 54.0(3.4) 59.3(84.2) 60.1(212.3) 61.1(152.3) 50.8(32.8) 54.7(212.0)
Flash. Similar token-efficiency was observed for Meta- Discovered System Prompt
Qwen 2.5 7B as well. This starkly contrasts with Optimizer (Core Instructions)
the Direct Prompting (Without Reasoning) base- Model
line, which collapses entirely on these tasks. This
Gemini 2.0 Solve the problem. Only provide
divergence confirms that while intermediate com-
Flash the answer and do not provide
putation is strictly necessary for accuracy, the nar-
(Lower Ca- any explanations.
rative verbosity of that computation is highly com-
pacity)
pressible via regularized feedback.
Gemini 3.1 Solve the problem with extreme
5.2 Emergent Symbolic Reasoning
Pro conciseness. Do not use conver-
A qualitative examination of the optimized prompts (High Ca- sational filler, restate the ques-
(Table 1) and generated outputs (Table 2) re- pacity) tion, or write full sentences.
veals that CROP discovered prompts fundamen- Simply provide the final sum.
tally shifts how the target model structures its
intermediate logic. Rather than generating con- Table 4: Comparison of optimized system prompts gen-
erated by different meta-optimizers for the BBH Object
versational heuristics (e.g., “First, let us observe
Counting task. While the lower-capacity model (Gem-
that...”), the regularized prompts elicit a dense,
ini 2.0 Flash) defaults to a blunt truncation directive,
symbolic syntax. On GSM8K, the model spon-
the high-capacity model (Gemini 3.1 Pro) successfully
taneously adopts a mathematical shorthand anal-
synthesizes multi-faceted constraints targeting specific
ogous to the recently proposed “Chain-of-Draft” vectors of verbosity.
(Xu et al., 2025b) methodology. However, whereas
prior works rely on manual human engineering to
complex, multi-objective textual feedback requires
elicit this behavior, CROP discovers this optimal
both the extended context window and the ad-
reasoning syntax entirely autonomously.
vanced deductive reasoning capabilities inherent to
5.3 Role of Optimizer Scale in Generalization this larger model.
The meta-optimizer (O) is responsible for synthe-
5.4 Gradient Stability and Batch Dynamics
sizing batched textual accuracy and regularization
gradients into a coherent, updated system prompt. In standard deep learning, gradient variance is in-
In early iterations, deploying a lower-capacity versely proportional to batch size. We observe an
model (Gemini 2.0 Flash) as the meta-optimizer analogous phenomenon in regularized textual dif-
resulted in a severe degradation of prompt quality. ferentiation. As demonstrated in Table 5, ablation
The optimizer consistently overfit to idiosyncratic experiments utilizing stochastic updates (batch size
errors from isolated batch examples rather than de- of 1) yield extreme variance in the textual gradients.
riving generalizable instructional updates. Exten- When evaluating an isolated example, the meta-
sive tuning of the meta-optimizer’s system prompt optimizer frequently overfits to the length penalty,
failed to mitigate this limitation. prioritizing output compression over task accuracy
Ultimately, scaling the meta-optimizer to a fron- and aggressively stripping away critical cognitive
tier reasoning model—specifically Gemini 3.1 Pro instructions. This results in prompt collapse: the
with thinking capabilities enabled—resolved these generation of degenerate directives that entirely
issues and produced highly robust system prompts eliminate intermediate reasoning capacity. Con-
(See table 4). We hypothesize that synthesizing versely, scaling to a batch size of 128 stabilizes the
7

Optimization Discovered System Prompt constrained CoT and automatic prompt optimiza-
Setting (Core Instructions) tion baselines. Furthermore, our analysis reveals
that this dual-objective optimization automatically
Low Capacity Solve the problem. Only pro-
elicits highly efficient, symbolic reasoning struc-
Optimizer vide the answer and do not
tures, conceptually mirroring manual “Chain-of-
(Gemini provide any explanations.
Draft” prompting without requiring human inter-
2.0 Flash,
vention. Through systematic ablations, we also
B = 128)
identified that successful multi-objective textual
Stochastic Solve the problem concisely. optimization requires frontier-level model capacity
Optimization Go straight to the answer and large batch sizes to stabilize gradient variance
(Gemini 3.1 without restating the problem and prevent the collapse of intermediate logic.
Pro, B = 1) or adding redundant explana- Ultimately, CROP provides a highly practical,
tory sentences. deployment-ready methodology. By systematically
excising computational redundancy at the prompt
Optimal Con- Solve the problem with ex-
level rather than altering foundational weights, it
figuration treme conciseness. Do not
enables the scalable and cost-effective integration
(Gemini 3.1 use conversational filler, re-
of high-fidelity reasoning models into strict, real-
Pro, B = 128) state the question, or write
world production and agentic environments.
full sentences. Simply pro-
vide the final sum.
Limitations
Table 5: Qualitative ablation of discovered system
While CROP significantly reduces inference-time
prompts under different optimization constraints for
overhead, we acknowledge two primary limitations
the BBH dataset. Only the optimal configuration (high
capacity, large batch) successfully balances extreme regarding its current operational scope.
conciseness with the preservation of reasoning. One limitation of our current evaluation is that
we do not explicitly consider input token length or
cost. In modern production environments, prompt
multi-objective feedback. By providing the meta-
caching (or prefix caching) is a default feature that
optimizer with a statistically representative sample
automatically stores and reuses the initial segments
of both reasoning failures and excess verbosity,
of instructions. Because our framework produces a
large batches prevent regularization-induced col-
single, static system prompt that remains identical
lapse and ensure stable, convergent trajectories dur-
across all user queries, it perfectly leverages this
ing prompt optimization.
caching mechanism. By reusing this prior compu-
tational work, prefix caching reduces time-to-first-
6 Conclusion
token latency by up to 80% and decreases input
The deployment of Large Language Models in token costs by up to 90% (OpenAI, 2024). Conse-
complex reasoning pipelines has historically been quently, the financial impact of a slightly longer op-
bottlenecked by the severe latency and financial timized system prompt is effectively marginalized.
costs associated with verbose Chain-of-Thought This justifies our exclusive focus on constraining
generation. In this work, we introduced CROP, the verbosity of the generated output, which re-
a novel multi-objective automatic prompt opti- mains the primary driver of unmitigated inference
mization framework. By integrating a continu- costs.
ous textual regularization penalty directly into the Second, the optimization phase of CROP neces-
prompt optimization loop, CROP forces the meta- sitates access to high-capacity reasoning models
optimizer to navigate the Pareto frontier of accu- (e.g., Gemini 3.1 Pro with Thinking). We observe
racy and token-consumption. that such model is required to effectively synthe-
Our empirical evaluations demonstrate that inter- size and balance conflicting objectives between
mediate reasoning is highly compressible. CROP task accuracy and textual regularization. Conse-
successfully reduces output token consumption by quently, the efficacy of using smaller, mid-tier mod-
up to 80.6% on rigorous reasoning benchmarks els as meta-optimizers for this dual-objective task
(GSM8K, BIG-Bench Hard, and LogiQA) while has not yet been established.
maintaining comparable accuracy compared to un-
8

References Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville.
2016. Deep learning. MIT press.
Aman Aggarwal and 1 others. 2024. Automix: Auto-
matically mixing language models. arXiv preprint
Qingyan Guo, Rui Wang, Junliang Guo, Bei Li, Kaitao
arXiv:2310.12963.
Song, Xu Tan, Guihong Liu, Ke Jiang, Jian-Guang
Reza Yazdani Aminabadi, Samyam Rajbhandari, Am- Yao, Min Zhang, and 1 others. 2023. Connecting
mar Ahmad Awan, Cheng Li, Du Li, Elton Zheng, large language models with evolutionary algorithms
Olatunji Ruwase, Shaden Smith, Minjia Zhang, Jeff yields powerful prompt optimizers. arXiv preprint
Rasley, and 1 others. 2022. Deepspeed-inference:
arXiv:2309.08532.
enabling efficient inference of transformer models at
unprecedented scale. In SC22: International Confer- Shibo Hao and 1 others. 2024. Training large language
ence for High Performance Computing, Networking, models to reason in a continuous latent space. arXiv
Storage and Analysis, pages 1–15. IEEE. preprint arXiv:2412.00000.
MOPO Authors. 2025. Mopo: Multi-objective prompt Yuhang Jian and 1 others. 2023. Ecoassistant: Using
optimization for affective text generation. In Pro- llm assistant more affordably and accurately. In Ad-
ceedings of the 31st International Conference on vances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
Computational Linguistics.
Huiqiang Jiang, Qianhui Wu, Chin-Yew Lin, Yuqing
Sanket Badhe and Deep Shah. 2026. Prompt-level
Yang, and Lili Qiu. 2023. Llmlingua: Compressing
distillation: A non-parametric alternative to model
prompts for accelerated inference of large language
fine-tuning for efficient reasoning. arXiv preprint
models. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on
arXiv:2602.21103.
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing.
Sanket Badhe, Deep Shah, and Nehal Kathrotia. 2026.
Long-tail knowledge in large language models: Tax- Yu Kang, Xianghui Sun, Liangyu Chen, and Wei Zou.
onomy, mechanisms, interventions and implications. 2024. C3ot: Generating shorter chain-of-thought
arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.16201. without compromising effectiveness. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2412.11664.
Maciej Besta, Nils Blatter, Lucian Dragos, Jing Lin, Ok-
sana Krause, and 1 others. 2024. Graph of thoughts: Omar Khattab, Arnav Singhvi, Paridhi Maheshwari,
Solving elaborate problems with large language mod- Zhiyuan Zhang, Keshav Santhanam, Sri Vard-
els. In International Conference on Learning Repre- hamanan, Saiful Haq, Ashutosh Sharma, Thomas T
sentations. Joshi, Hanna Moazam, and 1 others. 2024. Dspy:
Compiling declarative language model calls into
Christopher M Bishop and Nasser M Nasrabadi. 2006.
state-of-the-art pipelines. In International Confer-
Pattern recognition and machine learning. Springer.
ence on Learning Representations.
Jialin Chen and 1 others. 2024. Evoprompt: Evolution-
Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yu-
ary prompt optimization for large language models.
taka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. 2022. Large lan-
In International Conference on Learning Represen-
guage models are zero-shot reasoners. In Advances
tations.
in Neural Information Processing Systems.
Lingjiao Chen, Matei Zaharia, and James Zou. 2023.
Frugalgpt: How to use large language models while Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying
reducing cost and improving performance. In Ad- Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph E
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Jian Jin. 2023. Efficient
memory management for large language model serv-
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, ing with pagedattention. In Proceedings of the 29th
Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser, Matthias Symposium on Operating Systems Principles.
Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro
Nakano, and 1 others. 2021. Training verifiers
Ayeong Lee, Ethan Che, and Tianyi Peng. 2025.
to solve math word problems. arXiv preprint
How well do llms compress their own chain-of-
arXiv:2110.14168.
thought? a token complexity approach. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2503.01141.
Jiaxi Cui, Zongjian Li, Yang Yan, Bohua Chen, and
Li Yuan. 2023. Chatlaw: Open-source legal large
Zongqian Li, Yixuan Su, and Nigel Collier. 2024.
language model with integrated external knowledge
500xcompressor: Generalized prompt compres-
bases. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.16092.
sion for large language models. arXiv preprint
Mingkai Deng, Jianyu Wang, Cheng-Ping Hsieh, Yihan arXiv:2408.03094.
Wang, Han Guo, Tianmin Shu, Meng Song, Eric P
Xing, and Zhiting Hu. 2022. Rlprompt: Optimizing Hunter Lightman, Vineet Kosaraju, Yura Burda, Harri
discrete text prompts with reinforcement learning. In Edwards, Bowen Baker, and 1 others. 2024. Let’s
Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical verify step by step. In International Conference on
Methods in Natural Language Processing. Learning Representations.
9

Jian Liu, Leyang Cui, Hanmeng Liu, Dandan Huang, Matthew Renze and Erhan Guven. 2024. The ben-
Yile Wang, and Yue Zhang. 2020. Logiqa: A chal- efits of a concise chain of thought on problem-
lenge dataset for machine reading comprehension solving in large language models. arXiv preprint
with logical reasoning. In Proceedings of the Twenty- arXiv:2401.05618.
Ninth International Joint Conference on Artificial
Intelligence. Deep Shah, Sanket Badhe, and Nehal Kathrotia. 2026.
Taxonomy of the retrieval system framework: Pitfalls
Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler and paradigms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.20131.
Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri Alon,
Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, Yikang Shen and 1 others. 2025. Codi: Compress-
and 1 others. 2023. Self-refine: Iterative refinement ing chain-of-thought into continuous space via self-
with self-feedback. In Advances in Neural Informa- distillation. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference
tion Processing Systems. on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing.
Minjia Mao, Bowen Yin, Yu Zhu, and Xiao Fang. 2025.
Early stopping chain-of-thoughts in large language
Taylor Shin, Yasaman Razeghi, Robert L Logan IV,
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.14004.
Eric Wallace, and Sameer Singh. 2020. Autoprompt:
Eliciting knowledge from language models with au-
Rithesh Murthy, Ming Zhu, Liangwei Yang, Jielin
tomatically generated prompts. In Proceedings of the
Qiu, Juntao Tan, Shelby Heinecke, Silvio Savarese,
2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Caiming Xiong, and Huan Wang. 2025. Promp-
Language Processing.
tomatix: An automatic prompt optimization frame-
work for large language models. arXiv preprint
Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath,
arXiv:2507.14241.
Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. 2023. Re-
Maxwell Nye, Anders Johan Andreassen, Guy Gur- flexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement
Ari, Aitor Lewkowycz Henry, Vikash Mansinghka, learning. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
Vedant Mikulik, and Nathanael Schärli. 2021. Show
cessing Systems.
your work: Scratchpads for intermediate computa-
tion with language models. In Advances in Neural Claudio Spiess, Mandana Vaziri, Louis Mandel,
Information Processing Systems. and Martin Hirzel. 2025. Autopdl: Automatic
prompt optimization for llm agents. arXiv preprint
Isaac Ong and 1 others. 2024. Routellm: Learning arXiv:2504.04365.
to route llms with preference data. In Proceedings
of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Aarohi Srivastava, Abhinav Rastogi, Abhishek Rao,
Natural Language Processing. Abu Awal Md Shoeb, Abubakar Abid, Adam Fisch,
Adam R Brown, Adam Santoro, Aditya Gupta, Adrià
OpenAI. 2024. Prompt caching. Accessed: 2026-03- Garriga-Alonso, and 1 others. 2023. Beyond the
17. imitation game: Quantifying and extrapolating the
capabilities of language models. Transactions on
Xiaoying Pan and 1 others. 2025. Autopdl: Automatic Machine Learning Research.
prompt optimization for llm agents. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2504.04365.
Mirac Suzgun, Nathan Scales, Nathanael Schärli, Se-
bastian Gehrmann, Yi Tay, Hyung Won Chung,
Rohan Patel, Kshitij Sharma, and Anil Gupta. 2024.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Quoc V Le, Ed H Chi,
Verbosity ̸= veracity: Demystify verbosity compen-
Denny Zhou, and 1 others. 2023. Challenging big-
sation behavior of large language models. arXiv
bench tasks and whether chain-of-thought can solve
preprint arXiv:2411.07858.
them. In Findings of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: ACL 2023.
Reiner Pope, Sholto Douglas, Aakanksha Chowdhery,
Jacob Devlin, James Bradbury, and 1 others. 2022.
Chenglin Wang and 1 others. 2023a. Instructzero: Ef-
Efficiently scaling transformer inference. arXiv
ficient instruction optimization for black-box large
preprint arXiv:2211.05102.
languagemodels. InAdvancesinNeuralInformation
Archiki Prasad, Peter Hase, Xiang Zhou, and Mohit Processing Systems.
Bansal. 2023. Grips: Gradient-free, edit-based in-
structionsearchforpromptinglargelanguagemodels. et al. Wang. 2025. Compressing chain-of-thought
In Proceedings of the 17th Conference of the Euro- in llms via step entropy. arXiv preprint
pean Chapter of the Association for Computational arXiv:2508.03346.
Linguistics.
XuezhiWang, JasonWei, DaleSchuurmans, QuocVLe,
Reid Pryzant, Dan iterative, and 1 others. 2023. Au- Ed H Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdhery,
tomatic prompt optimization with gradient descent and Denny Zhou. 2023b. Self-consistency improves
and beam search. In Proceedings of the 2023 Con- chain of thought reasoning in language models. In
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language International Conference on Learning Representa-
Processing. tions.
10

Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten
Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, and Denny
Zhou. 2022. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits rea-
soning in large language models. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems.
Xilin Wei, Xiaoran Liu, Yuhang Zang, Xiaoyi Dong,
Yuhang Cao, Jiaqi Wang, Xipeng Qiu, and Dahua
Lin. 2025. Sim-cot: Supervised implicit chain-of-
thought. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.20317.
et al. Wen. 2025. Pareto prompt optimization. In Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations.
Shijie Wu, Ozan Irsoy, Steven Lu, Vadim Dabravol-
ski, Mark Dredze, Sebastian Gehrmann, Prabhan-
jan Kambadur, David Rosenberg, and Gideon Mann.
2023. Bloomberggpt: A large language model for
finance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17564.
Zhaofeng Wu and 1 others. 2025. An empirical study
on prompt compression for large language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.00019.
et al. Xia. 2025. Tokenskip: Controllable chain-of-
thought compression in llms. In Proceedings of the
2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing.
Guowei Xu, Mert Yuksekgonul, Carlos Guestrin, and
James Zou. 2025a. metatextgrad: Automatically op-
timizing language model optimizers. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2505.18524.
Silei Xu and 1 others. 2025b. Chain of draft:
Thinking faster by writing less. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2502.18600.
Chengrun Yang, Xuezhi Wang, Yifeng Lu, Hanxiao Liu,
Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou, and Xinyun Chen. 2024.
Large language models as optimizers. In Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Representations.
Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran,
Thomas L Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik
Narasimhan. 2023. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate
problem solving with large language models. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
Mert Yuksekgonul, Federico Bianchi, Daniil Boiko, and
1 others. 2024. Textgrad: Automatic differentiation
via text. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.07496.
Tom Zehle, Moritz Schlager, Timo Heiß, and Matthias
Feurer. 2025. Capo: Cost-aware prompt optimiza-
tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.16005.
Eric Zelikman, Yuhuai Wu, Jesse Mu, and Noah D
Goodman. 2022. Star: Bootstrapping reasoning with
reasoning. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems.
Yongchao Zhou, Andrei Ioan Muresanu, Zihao Zi,
Keiran Tucker, and 1 others. 2023. Large language
models are human-level prompt engineers. In Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations.
11

A Example Appendix
A.1 Baseline prompts
CoT
Think Step by Step.
Be concise
Think Step by Step. Be Concise.
Only Num/Eq
Think Step by Step. Only use numbers or equations.
AbbrevWords
Think Step by Step. Abbreviate words as much as possible.
UseOnlyNTokens
Think Step by Step. Do not use more than N words.
A.2 Initial prompts
GSM8K
You will answer a mathemetical reasoning question.
The last line of your response should be of the following format: ’Answer: $VALUE’ where
VALUE is a numerical value.
BBH Object counting
Solve the problem
The last line of your response should be of the following format: ’Answer: VALUE’ where
VALUE is a numerical value.
LogiQA
You will answer a logical reasoning question.
The last line of your response should be of the following format: ’Answer: VALUE’ where
VALUE is the zero-based numerical index of the correct answer.
A.3 TextGrad Learnt Prompts
GSM8K
You will answer a mathematical reasoning question. First, explicitly and concisely state the final
goal of the question.
Think step by step and be extremely concise in your reasoning. Avoid conversational filler and
jump straight into the math.
Define your variables clearly and explicitly track units during your intermediate calculations to
prevent conversion errors.
Carefully consider edge cases, hidden assumptions, overlapping sets, and ensure your final unit
matches what the question asks for (e.g., dollars vs. cents). Double-check your arithmetic.
The very last line of your response must be exactly of the following format: ’Answer: VALUE’
12

where VALUE is a pure integer.
Leave a blank line before this final line to completely isolate it from the rest of your explanation.
Ensure there is exactly one space after the colon. Do not include any dollar signs ($), commas,
units, periods, or any other extraneous characters in VALUE. There should be absolutely no
additional text, punctuation, or whitespace following the integer.
BBH Object counting
Solve the problem.
To ensure proper parsing, keep your response as concise as possible.
The very last line of your response must be exactly of the following format: ’Answer: VALUE’
where VALUE is an integer.
Do not include any additional text, punctuation, or spaces after the numerical value.
LogiQA
You are an expert in logical reasoning. You will answer a logical reasoning question by selecting
the correct option from the provided list.
Follow these systematic steps:
1. **Analyze the Query:** Carefully break down the context and the question. Identify the core
logical structure, premises, definitions, and specific requirements. Pay special attention to negative
constraints (e.g., "NOT", "cannot", "least likely") and the modality required (e.g., "must be true",
"most weakens"). Explicitly state the ultimate goal of the question (e.g., "The goal is to find an
alternative explanation that directly undermines the causal link").
2. **Formulate Criteria:** Establish clear, precise, and prioritized criteria that the correct answer
must satisfy based on your logical analysis. Include negative criteria (what the correct option must
*not* do) and distinguish between necessary and sufficient conditions.
3. **Evaluate Options:** Systematically and concisely analyze every option using its zero-based
index (e.g., Option 0, Option 1, Option 2, Option 3). Use strong, decisive language to explain
exactly how it meets or fails the formulated criteria.
- For "weaken/strengthen" questions, prioritize options that directly attack or support the core
premise or mechanism over those providing indirect, tangential, or correlational impacts.
- For "must be true/inference" questions, ensure the deduction is a necessary consequence of
the provided premises. Explicitly reject options that are merely "possible" or require external,
unwarranted assumptions.
- Address potential nuances (e.g., correlation vs. causation, ambiguity, shifts in scope), clearly
explaining why an incorrect option is logically flawed.
4. **Compare and Conclude:** Conduct a rigorous and direct comparative analysis of the most
viable options. Be decisive. Explicitly contrast the strengths of the correct option against the
specific weaknesses of the runners-up to summarize why the selected option is definitively the
best or only correct choice.
5. **Final Answer:** Skip any section heading for this step. On the very last line of your response,
provide the final answer in the exact format:
Answer: VALUE (where VALUE is the single zero-based integer index of the correct option).
CRITICAL FORMATTING RULE: The final line MUST be exactly ’Answer: VALUE’ (e.g.,
’Answer: 2’) with NO additional spaces, NO periods, and NO extra text following the integer. The
integer must be the absolute final character of your generated response.
13

A.4 CROP Prompts
GSM8K
You will answer a mathematical reasoning question concisely, showing the combined essential
calculations leading directly to the final numerical answer. Omit intermediate labels. Focus on
chained calculations. The last line of your response should be of the following format: ’Answer:
VALUE’ where VALUE is a numerical value.
BBH Object counting
You will answer a mathematical reasoning question. Present your reasoning solely through a
single-line numerical calculation, summing only the pure numerical values identified from the
question. Do not include item names, descriptions, or separate itemized lists. Do not include
any introductory or conversational phrases. The last line of your response must be of the exact
following format: ’Answer: VALUE’ where VALUE is a pure numerical integer (without any
currency symbols like ’$’ or extra characters).
LogiQA
You will answer a logical reasoning question.
Be concise and direct in your reasoning. Avoid unnecessary introductions, restatements of the
problem, or verbose explanations. Briefly explain why the correct answer is right and succinctly
state why the incorrect options are wrong.
The very last line of your response MUST be exactly of the following format: ’Answer: VALUE’
where VALUE is the zero-based numerical index of the correct answer. Do not add any extra
spaces or characters to this final line.
A.5 Gradient Prompts
Accuracy Feedback Gradient Prompt
You are an expert Prompt Engineer.
You will give feedback to a variable with the following role: <ROLE> response from
the language model </ROLE>.
Here is an evaluation of the variable using a string-based function:
Function purpose: The runtime of string-based function that checks if the prediction is
correct, where the answer is followed by "Answer :"
<INPUTS_TO_FUNCTION> {}
Ground truth answer(role: correct answer for the query): {} </INPUTS_TO_FUNCTION>
<OUTPUT_OF_FUNCTION> {} </OUTPUT_OF_FUNCTION>
Objective: Your goal is to give feedback and criticism to the variable given the above
evaluation output. Our only goal is to improve the above metric, and nothing else.
</OBJECTIVE_FUNCTION>
We are interested in giving feedback to the response from the language model for this
conversation. Specifically, give feedback to the following span of text:
14

<VARIABLE> {} </VARIABLE>
Given the above history, describe how the response from the language model could be
improved to improve the Objective. Be very creative, critical, and intelligent.
Length Regularization Gradient
You are an expert Prompt Engineer and Efficiency Strategist.
You will give feedback to a variable (also known as MODEL_PROMPT) with the fol-
lowing role: <ROLE> structured system prompt to a somewhat capable language model that
specifies the behavior </ROLE>.
<MODEL_PROMPT> {} </MODEL_PROMPT>
<QUESTION> {} </QUESTION>
<MODEL_RESPONSE> {} </MODEL_RESPONSE>
<OBJECTIVE_FUNCTION>Reduce the length of the model response by only few words
without hurting the quality, and trying to keep as much reasoning and important stuff and focus on
removing the fluff.</OBJECTIVE_FUNCTION>
Large language model takes <MODEL_PROMPT> and <QUESTION> as input and
generates the <MODEL_RESPONSE>.
Given the above history, describe how the response from the language model could be
updated to achieve the <OBJECTIVE_FUNCTION> without hurting the quality of the response.
Be very creative, critical, and intelligent.
A.6 Optimizer prompt
System Prompt Update Strategy
Here is the role of the variable you will improve:
<ROLE>structured system prompt to a somewhat capable language model that specifies the
behavior and strategies for the QA task</ROLE>.
The variable is the text within the following span:
<VARIABLE> {current_system_prompt} </VARIABLE>
Here is the context and feedback we got for the variable:
<CONTEXT>
(The following block repeats for each conversation in the dataset:)
Here is a conversation:
<CONVERSATION>
<LM_SYSTEM_PROMPT> {current_system_prompt} </LM_SYSTEM_PROMPT>
<LM_INPUT> {questions[i]} </LM_INPUT>
<LM_OUTPUT> {forward_response[i]} </LM_OUTPUT>
15

</CONVERSATION>
This conversation is potentially part of a larger system. The output is used as response
from the language model
Here is the feedback we got for structured system prompt to a somewhat capable lan-
guage model that specifies the behavior and strategies for the QA task in the conversation:
<FEEDBACK>
{feedback_response[i]}
</FEEDBACK>
<REGULARIZATION_FEEDBACK>
{regularization_responses[i]}
</REGULARIZATION_FEEDBACK>
</CONTEXT>
Improve the variable (structured system prompt to a somewhat capable language model
that specifies the behavior and strategies for the QA task) using the feedback provided in
<FEEDBACK> and <REGULARIZATION_FEEDBACK> tags.
Send the improved variable in the following format:
<IMPROVED_VARIABLE>{the improved variable}</IMPROVED_VARIABLE>
Send ONLY the improved variable between the <IMPROVED_VARIABLE> tags, and
nothing else.
16