Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback: 

 Whose Culture, Whose Values, Whose Perspectives? 

 
 Kristian Gonz lez Barman a , Simon Lohse b & Henk de Regtb

 Authors contributed equally to this work 

 Corresponding author 
 a Centre for Logic and Philosophy of Science, Department of Philosophy and Moral Sciences, Ghent

 University, Blandijnberg 2, 9000 Ghent, Belgium. 
 b Institute for Science in Society, Faculty of Science, Radboud University, the Netherlands.

 
 E-mails: KristianCampbell.GonzalezBarman@Ugent.be, simon.lohse@ru.nl , henk.deregt@ru.nl

 Abstract: We argue for the epistemic and ethical advantages of pluralism in Reinforcement Learning

 from Human Feedback (RLHF) in the context of Large Language Models (LLM). Drawing on social
 epistemology and pluralist philosophy of science, we suggest ways in which RHLF can be made more

 responsive to human needs and how we can address challenges along the way. The paper concludes

 with an agenda for change, i.e. concrete, actionable steps to improve LLM development.

 
 1.Introduction 

 Reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) is an increasingly common technique in artificial

 intelligence (AI) where a model learns by receiving feedback from humans rather than solely relying
 on a predefined reward function. This approach is particularly useful when designing AI systems for

 tasks where it is difficult to specify a precise reward function or when it is important to align the
 model's behaviour with certain human expectations and values. For instance, RLHF has notably

 improved language models for context-aware text generation (Ziegler et al. 2020) and taught robots
 to navigate cluttered environments (Henry et al. 2010). 

 
 RLHF is commonly employed in the later stages of fine-tuning models, particularly in the development
 of prominent Large Language Models (LLMs) like GPT-3.5 or GPT-4. Initially, these models undergo

 training using vast text corpora to grasp a broad range of language patterns and contexts. This
 foundational training is supplemented by task-specific fine-tuning, where the models are adjusted to

 excel in particular applications, such as understanding and generating dialogues. The refinement
 process is then further enhanced through RLHF. The RLHF process often involves people evaluating

 and ranking potential outcomes to build a classification model. This model is designed to predict if a
 human would find a specific output acceptable. The initial model undergoes refinement through a

 1 

 

 

 

 
 step-by-step process where it can use this classification model for feedback, allowing for
 improvement. This iterative process enables the model to better align with human judgement over

 time. 

 One question that becomes significant in this context is what role the composition of the human

 feedback group plays in the process. After all, a certain diversity in composition seems to be a clear
 advantage1 in the development of models like ChatGPT. The feedback providers' background

 knowledge and their social, cultural and political perspectives may (or so we will argue) significantly
 influence the model and a lack of diversity among individuals may lead to a model that is overly

 geared towards only specific expectations, potentially overlooking different but also important values
 and perspectives. Accordingly, too much homogeneity may raise ethical concerns and also create

 epistemic limitations, as the model may generate outputs that are hardly broadly acceptable,
 applicable or insightful. One key insight that emerges from our analysis is that achieving balance in

 LLM outputs need not require each individual evaluator to provide balanced feedback. Rather, more
 robust and nuanced outputs can emerge from the interplay of multiple distinct perspectives, each

 potentially representing a clear stance or worldview. 

 Despite the apparent benefits of diversity in RLHF, the philosophical underpinnings of why and how it

 may improve model performance have not been thoroughly explored. This paper offers an analytical
 perspective on the impact of diverse feedback on LLM development. Our investigation is motivated

 by two distinct but intertwined objectives: first, to elucidate the complex interplay between diversity,
 balance, and reliability in the development of LLMs employing RLHF. Second, to explore challenges for

 increasing diversity in RLHF and point to potential ways for managing these challenges.

 The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 provides a brief overview of the landscape of RLHF and

 associated problems, highlighting the need for diversity in feedback. Section 3 introduces ideas from
 philosophy of science and social epistemology which can serve as useful conceptual tools to

 understand and manage the identified problems. Section 4 develops initial ideas about how RLHF can
 be improved by making it more pluralistic and discusses open questions and trade-offs that need to

 be addressed to make progress along these lines. The final section concludes with a brief summary
 and an agenda for making RLHF more pluralistic. 

 

 
 1 For instance, Yamagata, McConville, and Santos-Rodriguez (2021) show that by incorporating feedback from a diverse
 group of trainers with varying skill levels and reliability into a Bayesian approach, it's possible to enhance the accuracy
 and robustness of Reinforcement Learning systems, even in the presence of unreliable sources. For an important
 theoretical perspective on the relationship between diversity and collective performance, see the "Diversity Trumps
 Ability Theorem" developed by Scott and Page and discussed in Landemore (2013); cf. Thompson, 2014 and Brennan,
 2021 for critical discussions of the applicability and scope of the theorem.
 2 

 

 

 

 

 
 2. Reinforcement learning and associated challenges. 

 RLHF is a useful method to align AI systems with human objectives, especially in the last stages of finetuning of state-of-the-art Large Language Models such as OpenAI's GPT-4 or Meta s LLama 3. This
 technique has become central in adapting AI models to complex, human-centric expectations and

 preferences. The clearest example of this was Davinci 3.5 (the first version of ChatGPT), which was far

 more safe, user-friendly , and well received in terms of dialogic conversation style than GPT3.

 Originating from revealed preference theory in economics, RLHF was adopted in machine learning for

 applications in human-computer interaction and reinforcement learning2. The standard methodology
 for RLHF was popularised in 2017 (Christiano et al. 2017) and has significantly influenced the deep

 reinforcement learning community. Note that LLMs are fundamentally stochastic machines that are
 proficient at generating text rather than systems that track or contain referential knowledge. While

 they can generate remarkably coherent and seemingly knowledgeable outputs, they operate through
 statistical pattern matching rather than by maintaining or accessing a database of facts about the

 world. This fundamental characteristic of LLMs has important implications for RLHF, as the feedback
 process aims to shape probabilistic language generation patterns rather than to instil or correct actual

 knowledge (we will come back to this below). 

 The advantages of RLHF are manifold. It enables humans to communicate goals to AI systems without

 the need for having a previously defined reward function. This not only makes reward shaping implicit
 and intuitive, but mitigates reward hacking (Casper et al. 2023), where an AI might exploit loopholes

 in a reward function to achieve high scores without actually fulfilling the task the reward function is a
 proxy for. Furthermore, RLHF facilitates a dynamic learning process where AI models can continuously

 evolve based on real-time human feedback, which enables companies with a large user base to
 improve their models with faster cycles. This ongoing interaction results in AI systems that are more

 aligned with the values and expectations of the model s users, ensuring their relevance and utility.

 Consequently, AI systems that incorporate RLHF might be better equipped to operate in complex
 moral and social landscapes, making them more trustworthy and reliable for a broad range of

 applications. 

 
 2 Historically, RLHF can be situated within the broader framework of inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) approaches.
 IRL, first formalized by Ng & Russell (2000), addresses the fundamental problem of recovering an unknown reward
 function from observed optimal behaviour. While both RLHF and IRL aim to learn from human input, IRL traditionally
 focused on inferring reward functions from demonstrated optimal behaviour, whereas RLHF leverages direct human
 feedback on model outputs. This distinction is particularly relevant as RLHF does not assume optimal demonstrations
 but rather works with potentially noisy human preferences and feedback. 
 3 

 

 

 

 
 The process of RLHF, involves three sequential steps (Casper et al. 2023): Feedback Collection, Reward
 Modeling, and Policy Optimization. Feedback Collection involves the human assessment of model

 outputs, followed by Reward Modeling, where these assessments are used to train a reward model
 via supervised learning aiming to replicate the preferences of human evaluations. The final step, Policy

 Optimization, optimizes the pretrained LLM3 to generate outputs positively rated by the reward
 model. The term policy here refers to the updated LLM, which uses some form of reinforcement

 learning to improve the pretrained LLM. 

 To illustrate this, imagine an AI designed to write creative stories undergoing this three-step process.

 Initially, humans evaluate the stories the AI produces (e.g. based on creativity, coherence, and

 emotional impact). These evaluations guide the training of a reward model that predicts whether a
 story is appealing to humans (i.e., whether human evaluators would give it a good score). Finally, the

 AI's story-writing process is optimised based on feedback from the reward model, enabling it to
 produce narratives that better resonate with human readers, thus improving its ability to craft

 engaging and coherent stories. 

 Note, however, that the outputs of the AI will be influenced by the preferences of the evaluators,

 which may lead to a narrowing of the AI's capabilities and a potential bias towards certain types of
 stories or storytelling techniques. This risk is most clearly seen when stories are intended to contain

 answers to scientific questions, where evaluators might prefer concise and simple answers, posing a
 risk that the AI learns to provide a simplified but (potentially) misleading answer rather than a

 scientifically adequate one (Perez et al. 2022; see also Barman et al. 2024). In its most extreme form,

 this might involve giving not just simplified, but wrong answers altogether; for instance, the model
 may "hallucinate" responses to avoid answering that it does not know as this might be rated poorly.

 While this result could be seen as a simple consequence of prioritising user satisfaction, it may come
 at the expense of other values such as scientific accuracy and reliability. Given these (as well as other)

 potential trade-offs, it becomes important to consider which values one should aim for.

 The human feedback used in RLHF includes, among others, label feedback, binary preference
 feedback, correction feedback, and language feedback. This involves tasks such as ranking outputs

 (e.g., in order of quality), choosing one output over another, providing explanations as to why a certain

 output is not correct (or how it could be improved), or providing an example of what the right output
 should be. Each feedback type has its distinct advantages and limitations, and there are multiple tradeoffs at play (e.g., between the difficulty of the task, the ability of gathering enough feedback given a

 
 3 It should be noted that before RLHF, there is usually a step of instruction fine-tuning, where the pre-trained LLM is
 refined on task-specific data, such as for dialogue generation. 
 4 

 

 

 

 
 certain budget, or the difficulty of having humans with enough skill to perform these tasks). Despite
 its widespread use, certain limitations of RLHF in fine-tuning LLMs are notable. Perez et al. (2022) point

 out that models fine-tuned using RLHF often display biases and can lead to the mirroring of certain
 ideologies. El-Mhamdi et al. (2023) observe that these models could unintentionally reveal sensitive

 information. Furthermore, there is clear evidence of these models indeed producing hallucinated or
 inaccurate content (OpenAI et al. 2023). Moreover, RLHF doesn t protect these models against

 adversarial attacks, including jailbreaking4 or prompt injection/extraction5 (Li et al. 2023). The

 response behaviour of these models can also be undesirable in several other ways.

 These problems are too multifaceted to address them in one paper and require different types of
 solutions. In the following, we will focus primarily on problems of RLHF that are related to the content

 level, i.e. on models that have been tutored by humans but may still (or rather: because of this)
 generate biased, inaccurate or in other ways problematic responses to user prompts. Here are some

 examples for what we have in mind, drawing from an overview of the issues by Casper et al. (2023):

 
 - RLHF can amplify biases and one-sided opinions of human evaluators, a phenomenon known
 as sycophancy . This issue worsens with larger models and is not effectively mitigated by the

 RLHF process. 
 - RLHF can reinforce politically unbalanced judgements of the tutored models, an issue that

 seems to be associated with the demographic composition of the selected evaluators (Motoki
 et al. 2023). 

 - Some LLMs have been observed to become less accurate over time which may be, at least in
 part, a consequence of RLHF where evaluators make mistakes in light of difficult topic areas.

 - The RLHF process may introduce unanticipated model drift (Metz, 2023; cf. Chen et al. 2023),

 meaning that the behaviour of the model might inadvertently shift from what was expected.
 - Evaluators can intentionally or unintentionally insert harmful data into RLHF systems,

 especially given the scale at which RLHF operates. An example would be a (malicious) actor
 providing high ratings for clearly unethical responses of an LLM. 

 
 So what is at the heart of these problems? And how can we improve RLHF so that we can cope with
 them? Although there is probably no single answer to these questions, we argue that the outlined

 

 4 Jailbreaking refers to the process of exploiting a model to break its constraints or intended use cases, enabling it to
 produce outputs that were otherwise restricted or unintended. This could involve tricking the model into generating
 harmful, biased, or prohibited content. 
 5 Prompt injection/extraction involves manipulating the model's input (injection) or extracting sensitive information
 from it (extraction) by crafting inputs in a specific way. This could be used to reveal personal data the model has been
 exposed to during training or to cause the model to act in unpredictable or undesired ways.
 5 

 

 

 

 
 epistemic and ethical challenges can best be understood through the lenses of social epistemology
 and pluralism, as a lack diversity of human feedback plays a crucial role in these problems, indicating

 that strengthening diversity in the right way may provide useful starting points for tackling the
 issues. 

 

 
 3. Conceptual tools from philosophy of science and social epistemology 
 Increasing diversity is an obvious remedy for some of the identified problems. Consider the issues of

 user biases and politically unbalanced judgements. It seems intuitive that increasing diversity of
 perspectives in RLHF might be a (partial) remedy for these specific issues. To improve the AI alignment

 process, it is critical to look beyond individual perspectives to encompass the broader norms,

 expectations, and values of various groups. However, to better understand the underlying reasons for
 this and also why pluralism might be promising to understand and address some of the other problems

 mentioned, it will be helpful to introduce three interrelated concepts from post-positivist philosophy
 of science and social epistemology (as they have been developed by Paul Feyerabend, Sandra Harding,

 Helen Longino and others; see Grasswick, 2018 for an overview). 

 
 I. Social cognition: Feminist epistemologists such as Longino (1990) show that knowledge production
 is a communal, interactive process that is shaped by the way the process is organised on a social level.

 The way it is organised in particular, the way in which the influence of values in the process is handled
 can either promote or hamper the quality of the produced knowledge. While Longino makes this

 point in the context of science, the point generalises to reliable knowledge production per se. For

 instance, if you want to do a strategic SWOT (strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, threats) analysis
 in an organisation you will likely arrive at a richer, more reliable picture if you systematically

 incorporate internal feedback on different levels of the organisational hierarchy than if you only rely
 on the input of the top management. Organising this process according to an ideal of inclusiveness

 makes things better (cf. Bengio et al. 2024). This example brings another aspect of the sociality of
 knowledge to the fore, namely that knowledge is often socially distributed - no member of the

 organisation has complete knowledge about the organisation, but this knowledge is distributed
 among members and certain roles (the same applies to knowledge in scientific communities and many

 other contexts, see, e.g., Uygun Tun 2023). 

 
 II. Pluralistic triangulation: In order to truly understand a particular (epistemic or ethical) problem or

 question, it is useful to compare and contrast different points of view. Through this triangulation
 process, we can avoid myopia and errors in possible answers or solutions. This is because the extent

 6 

 

 

 

 
 to which alternative points of view have blind spots or problematic assumptions often only becomes
 apparent through contrast. This simple yet powerful insight goes back at least to J.S. Mill s defence of

 freedom of speech and has most forcefully been defended by Feyerabend (1975, 1999)6. Think of the
 recent Coronavirus crisis. It was precisely the public involvement of experts beyond medicine and

 epidemiology (such as social scientists and managers of retirement homes) in analysing the public
 crisis that helped to bring an excessive focus on health (rather than, e.g., social justice) and

 problematic assumptions about pandemic modelling to light. This was in part the result of

 triangulation of perspectives, approaches, and also of different value commitments (Bschir and Lohse
 2022). 

 
 III. Positionality: People s perspectives differ in systematic ways, influencing the ways individuals

 understand and interpret the world. More specifically, perspectives are shaped by personal
 experiences which in turn are connected to social position and role in society, most prominently by

 gender, social class and ethnicity. This insight from the sociology of knowledge can be considered as
 commonplace today. Feminist social epistemology, however, highlights two points. First, perspectives

 may not only affect ethical and political beliefs (as already Marx would have argued), but also areas of

 knowledge that typically do not seem to be affected by them, such as scientific knowledge (as shown
 by recent work in the philosophy of science; e.g. Massimi 2022). Second, the perspectives of

 marginalised or oppressed groups can be especially fruitful in discovering hidden and/or problematic
 aspects of a claim or state of affairs. Marginalised groups may sometimes be in a position where they

 can combine insider and outsider perspectives to enrich mainstream-dominated discourses and
 positions and to counteract negative consequences of marginalisation/oppression for knowledge

 production (Harding 1996; Intemann 2010) which also raises the question of appropriate
 representation of different groups (see below). An example of this can be found in gender-biased

 explanations in primatology, which primarily emphasised the role of male animals in shaping social
 hierarchies, not taking into account the active role of female primates; a bias that only became

 apparent when more female researchers entered the field, who were sensitive to both sides of gender

 dominance due to their own positions in patriarchal societies (Haraway 1984).

 
 Taken together, these concepts underline the importance of including multiple viewpoints from
 different social positions in a well-organised process if one is interested in a less error-prone and

 biased and more reliable and ethically robust understanding of many aspects of the world. Note that
 the above discussion of these concepts has an epistemic as well as an ethical dimension and implies

 
 6 See Lloyd (1997) for the connection between Mill and Feyerabend. 

 7 

 

 

 

 
 that these are not independent. This aligns with a prominent strand in the current philosophical
 debate about the role of values in science, criticizing the traditional value-free ideal of science

 (Douglas 2009). This traditional view has been superseded by a more nuanced view defended by Kuhn
 (1977), which states that scientific research and indeed any kind of truth-orientated knowledge

 production should rely only on so-called epistemic values (such as accuracy and consistency) and
 exclude the influence of non-epistemic values (such as moral or political values). The reason would be

 that the former are conducive to finding objective truth, while the latter are inherently subjective.

 However, as Douglas and others have convincingly argued, even this more nuanced value-free ideal is
 untenable. One reason is that the distinction between epistemic and non-epistemic values cannot be

 drawn sharply (Rooney 2017). Another reason is that in many types of epistemic practices, nonepistemic values are ineliminably involved in decisions about the acceptance or rejection of

 hypotheses, for example in statistical hypothesis testing (the so-called problem of inductive risk; see
 Douglas, 2009). While these insights from philosophy of science do not correspond directly to issues

 in AI, they support the idea that epistemic and non-epistemic (e.g. ethical) considerations are typically
 intertwined in knowledge production.7 

 

 It might be objected, however, that the two dimensions need to be kept apart because conflating
 them runs the risk of threatening the objectivity of the knowledge production process. As regards the

 epistemic dimension, a pluralistic approach that includes different perspectives is more suitable to
 eliminate mistakes and biases and hence will produce more accurate and robust results. In a word, it

 will enhance the objectivity of the outcomes of the knowledge-production process. By contrast,
 allowing a plurality of moral values to affect the process will jeopardize the objectivity of the

 outcomes, or so the objectors might claim. We submit, however, that this objection holds water only
 if objectivity is defined as the outcome of reasoning processes in which non-epistemic values are

 absent. But, as Douglas (2009, 115-129) argues, objectivity can be achieved in various other ways,
 where it is important to note that the term objectivity can apply to various aspects of the knowledge

 production process and that a key feature of objectivity is that it is a basis for trust. Douglas

 distinguishes eight senses of objectivity, of which the following two are especially relevant for our
 purposes.8 First, with respect to individual thought processes, objectivity can be achieved by taking

 a position that is balanced or neutral with respect to a spectrum of values (Douglas 2009, 123). This
 is called value-neutral objectivity . Douglas adds that it may be allowed to exclude extreme positions

 
 7 But see Grote (2024) for an alterative view on the relation between epistemology and ethics in machine learning.
 8 (Hoyningen-Huene, 2023) argues that these different senses of objectivity are actually indicators of objectivity or
 means to increase objectivity (understood as the absence of distorting factors introduced by the knowers or epistemic
 subjects ). 

 8 

 

 

 

 
 (e.g. sexist or racist ones). Second, with respect to social processes (as noted above, a crucial element
 of knowledge production), the outcomes can be regarded as objective if they result from an open

 discussion by the members of the community. Various conditions have to be met to achieve such
 interactive objectivity , of which diversity among participants in the discussion also with regard to

 different value orientations is an important one (Douglas 2009, 127-128, cf. Longino 1990). In sum,
 Douglas analysis of objectivity not only evades the objection that value-laden science cannot be

 objective but also supports our case for improving RLHF by making it more diverse.

 
 Applying these insights to RLHF allows for an exploration of epistemic and ethical dimensions of AI

 (and in particular LLM) development. But before we can do this we will need to address a possible
 objection to our approach, namely why we should assume that we can apply ideas from philosophy

 of science and social epistemology to LLMs. As noted above, LLMs do not track truth or produce
 genuine knowledge but (re-)produce statistical patterns. They have even been described as

 stochastic parrots (Bender et al. 2021) and bullshit generators (Hicks et al. 2024). One might
 therefore come to the conclusion that our approach is fundamentally misguided. However, an

 objection along these lines overlooks that our analysis is aimed at RLHF as an epistemic design

 principle of LLMs. RHLF aims to make LLMs behave in such a way that responses to user prompts seem
 as if they would track truth, produce knowledge etc., leading to LLM outputs ideally indistinguishable

 from responses that a knowledgeable human or a group of humans would provide. Hence, it seems
 reasonable and of pragmatic value to examine RLHF through an epistemological (and also ethical) lens

 and proceed as we suggest. 

 
 From an epistemological standpoint, diverse human feedback aids in creating AI systems that are more
 reflective of varied human perspectives, thereby enhancing the models objectivity and applicability.

 Ethically, it aligns with the ideal of inclusivity, ensuring that AI systems do not perpetuate existing
 moral biases or inequalities. The described insights from pluralistic philosophy of science and social

 epistemology underscore the significance of incorporating feedback from a wide range of individuals

 in RHLF. This diversity goes beyond mere political representation; it is about avoiding too much
 homogeneity and integrating various epistemic standpoints that arise from different social, cultural,

 and political positions and backgrounds. These standpoints bring unique insights, challenge prevailing
 assumptions, and may ultimately contribute to a more balanced and comprehensive a more

 humanistic AI model. However, to achieve this, we argue, it would be necessary to revise key
 elements in the RHLF process in light of the above considerations. In the next section, we make initial

 

 
 9 

 

 

 

 
 suggestions along these lines and point out open questions that need to be addressed to make
 progress. 

 

 4. Open questions and potential trade-offs 

 How can we make RLHF more pluralistic and what are the challenges along the way? To make progress
 on these questions, we will present tentative ideas. Above all, however, we want to point out

 important issues that will need to be addressed to move forward. We first give a quick overview of
 some practical aspects. We will then discuss evaluator selection, guidance and monitoring, and

 aggregation of individual feedback. Finally, we will point out possible trade-offs of different types.

 4.1 Current practices 

 We focus on OpenAI s methods, as ChatGPT is the model with most users. While OpenAI does not

 disclose too many details, there is general information as to how this feedback was collected in the
 initial stages. Ouyang et al. (2022) provide information on how feedback was collected from humans

 (in particular, they hired a team of 40 contractors on Upwork and ScaleAI), including instructions for
 human evaluators and related details to fine-tune InstructGPT (the direct predecessor of ChatGPT):

 1. Labeller Selection and Criteria: Labellers were chosen based on their agreement with

 sensitive speech flagging, agreement on rankings, sensitive demonstration writing, and selfassessed ability to identify sensitive speech for different groups.9 The selection process aimed
 to ensure labellers were sensitive to various demographic groups and could identify

 potentially harmful outputs. 

 2. Detailed Labelling Instructions: Labellers received detailed instructions on evaluating text
 outputs based on their helpfulness, truthfulness, and harmlessness. The way of evaluating

 helpfulness was in terms of whether the output followed the users intentions and helped
 solving the task. The way of evaluating truthfulness was in terms of the output containing

 accurate information, and not misleading the user. Evaluating harmlessness involved

 considering that the output should not cause physical, psychological, or social harm to people;
 or damage to equipment, property, the environment, institutions, or resources necessary to

 human wellbeing (for examples consult the paper by Ouyang et al. and the public labelling
 instructions provided to evaluators). 

 

 
 9 In other words, they assessed their ability to identify potentially offensive content, they evaluated their consistency
 in evaluating and comparing content, they tested their capability to write responses that consider sensitivity issues,
 and they required labellers to evaluate their own ability to recognize content that may be sensitive.
 10 

 

 

 

 
 3. Labelling Instructions Evolution: The instructions given to labellers evolved throughout the
 project to address feedback and a better understanding of the desired measurements.

 Initially, labellers were instructed to prioritise helpfulness to the user above truthfulness and
 harmlessness. However, in the final evaluations, the emphasis shifted to prioritise

 truthfulness and harmlessness. Here are some of the instructions given (from the instruction
 sheet): 

 
 For each input instruction, labelling will consist of 3 parts:
 1. Labelling instructions. You ll label a bunch of properties of the instruction,
 including whether it contains PII, etc. [some examples: Personally identifying
 information, User intent is unclear, Asks for sexual content, Asks for violent
 content, Asks for content denigrating a protected class10, Asks for moral
 judgement, etc.] 
 2. Labelling AI model outputs. For each output from an AI model, you ll label
 the outputs along several different axes, including giving a 1-7 rating,
 judging whether it contains violent or sexual content, etc.
 3. Ranking AI model outputs. You ll rank outputs from best to worst, including
 ties. 

 (Instruction sheet, footnote added [accessed 11 December 2024])
 [https://docs.google.com/document/d/1MJCqDNjzD04UbcnVZ-LmeXJ04-
 TKEICDAepXyMCBUb8/edit#heading=h.21o5xkowgmpj] 

 
 4. Collaboration with Labellers: The project involved close collaboration with labellers, including

 an onboarding process, detailed task instructions, and a shared chat room for answering
 questions. 

 
 5. Labeller Demographics: A voluntary anonymous survey was sent to labellers to understand
 their demographics better (see fig. 1): 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 10 From Appendix B, List of protected classes: Race, Color, Religion or creed, National origin or ancestry, Sex (including
 gender, pregnancy, sexual orientation, and gender identity), Age, Physical or mental disability, Veteran status, Genetic
 information, Citizenship. 

 11 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Figure 1. Labeller demographics (Ouyang 2022, p.40). The demographic data shows that the
 largest ethnic group was Southeast Asian (52.6%), followed by White/Caucasian (31.6%).

 Nationalities included Filipino and Bangladeshi (22% each), and American (17%). Most
 participants were aged 25-34 (47.4%), and educationally, 52.6% had an undergraduate

 degree, while 36.8% held a master's degree. 

 The initial stages arguably lacked diversity. However, with its opening to the broader user base of

 OpenAI, the diversity of users providing feedback has seen significant improvement, as all users
 throughout (193 countries as of January 2024) are able to provide feedback. The current ChatGPT

 interface allows users to give a thumbs up, thumbs down and to copy the output generated by the
 model. Sometimes the user is given two alternatives from which to choose. Additionally, when the

 

 
 12 

 

 

 

 
 model is asked to regenerate an answer, the user is asked whether the second answer was better,
 worse, or the same as the previous answer. 

 Now that we have a rough overview of some aspects of the process11, we will discuss pluralistic reform

 ideas and associated challenges. Out of the 3 steps of RLHF, feedback collection and reward modelling

 are the most relevant for our purposes. For the first, we distinguish issues related to selecting
 evaluators and to guiding and monitoring them. For the second, we consider issues related to the

 reception and aggregation of the data and its implications for training of a reward model. We also
 examine the relevance of guidance and the possibility of trade-offs. 

 4.2 Selecting evaluators 

 
 An obvious implication that follows from the above discussion on social epistemology is that the
 procedure to select evaluators for RLHF will need to be revised to make it more representative of the

 existing diversity of perspectives (to prevent composition like the initial one above, in which almost
 all raters are educated, almost half American and a third Filipino). While the latter stages in this case

 have more diversity than the initial ones, it should be noted that the current user demographic of
 OpenAI, and by extension the feedback provided for RLFH, may not fully represent society at large (or

 even broad segments of it). For instance, there likely is a predominance of younger, well-educated
 individuals who have both the knowledge and technological means to interact with the free version

 of ChatPGT. In the case of GPT-4, given that there is a financial barrier for prolonged/ professional use,
 it may lead to the self-selection of certain strata of the population. Similarly, there might be a selfselective mechanism of those that engage in providing feedback. The issue here is that there may be

 certain people who are more inclined to provide this feedback than others, creating a possible selfselection bias (see Bethlehem 2010 for self-selection effects in web surveys).

 Although these problems might be easy to identify, it is far less clear how they ought to be resolved.

 So far we detailed that a source of problems stems from the evaluators not representing broader
 groups (which is relevant because of positionality). This naturally raises the question of the sense in

 which evaluators should be representative. Answering this question involves normative choices
 regarding the sense in which we want to make LLMs better aligned with human goals. Having a panel

 that is truly representative of the world population seems hardly feasible, as it would require

 
 11 See Anthropic (Bai et al., 2022) for a discussion on Reinforcement Learning from AI Feedback (RLAIF),
 which extends Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) by using AI-generated evaluations.
 Unlike RLHF that depends on human judgement, RLAIF uses constitutional principles to guide AI selfcritique towards harmlessness and helpfulness, although due to similar stakeholder input challenges as
 RLHF, it falls prey to similar problems as the ones discussed below. 

 
 13 

 

 

 

 
 comprehensive knowledge of the relevant populations in all regions a level of detail we lack even
 for many well-studied countries. So, should developers aim for a specific subset of the world s

 population? If so, which one? Should they aim for a representative set of only a certain range of
 cultural and/or ethical standpoints and values (cf. Intemann 2010) and if so, which ones? Should they

 give a greater weight to evaluators that are less represented in the evaluator pool within society (e.g.
 elderly people)? Hidden in the background of these questions is an even more intricate one: Which

 dimension of diversity should be seen as relevant? Above, we pointed out that social and cultural

 standpoint matters. But this observation only points to the question of which dimensions of diversity
 are epistemically and/or ethically (most) relevant for RHLF. Natural candidates are gender, ethnicity,

 age, social class, and nationality. There may, however, be many more dimensions, some of them more
 difficult to operationalise than others, say cultural background and cognitive diversity.

 One can also ask the more fundamental question of whether representation should actually be the

 primary goal in the selection of evaluators - or whether we should treat adequate representation as
 means to our epistemic and ethical ends. Shouldn t there be certain thresholds, say regarding

 cognitive competencies and ethical outlooks?12 Above we highlighted the problem that evaluators

 may rate answers in ethically problematic ways. In those cases where a certain rating is not motivated
 by deliberately inserting harmful data but reflects the implicit sexist outlook of, say, a Christian

 fundamentalist should this perspective even be represented? If not, who pre-defines the spectrum of
 reasonable viewpoints? As we saw above, Douglas (2009, 124) argues that even if a balanced

 representation of the spectrum of values is desirable for yielding value-neutral objectivity, it may be
 allowed to exclude extreme positions for good moral reasons. However, it is certainly not easy or

 straightforward to determine when this is the case (we will come back to this in the next section).
 Another question of representativeness connects to the issue of marginalised perspectives. If it is

 indeed the case that model output is ethically/epistemically biased due to the fact that it is

 predominantly based on mainstream training data (neglecting and/or distorting minority viewpoints
 underrepresented in the text corpus, thereby amplifying various forms of epistemic injustice, see Kay

 et al. 2024)13, should the selection of evaluators be guided by a principle of affirmative action rather
 than pure representativeness? If so, those responsible for recruiting evaluators would also have to

 decide how these principles can be balanced in a reasonable way. A promising (and normatively

 
 12 OpenAI seemed to screen for this, to some extent, during the development of InstructGPT by conducting a test. This
 test consisted of a multi-part screening process involving sensitive speech flagging, ranking of model completions,
 demonstration writing, and self-assessed ability to identify sensitive content.
 13 For instance, generative amplified testimonial injustice: Generative AI models are more likely to reproduce the
 voices of those frequently represented and culturally dominant online, while erasing the voices of the socially
 marginalized. This creates a feedback loop where dominant narratives are amplified and marginalized voices are
 further silenced, compounding the testimonial injustice experienced by these groups (Kay et al. 2024).
 14 

 

 

 

 
 justified) starting point could be to experiment with different compositions that slightly overrepresent marginalised groups to understand the extent to which this actually influences the response

 behaviour of LLMs. 

 

 4.3 Guidance and monitoring 

 RLHF is a guided and monitored process. Evaluators do not act in a vacuum but are required to comply

 with certain guidelines. The developer team pre-defines which groups are classified as protected
 classes . Similarly, they are given examples as to what constitutes harm. For instance, as can be seen

 in the instruction sheet (see Section 4.1), outputs such as The most common type of home-made

 bomb is made from a pressure cooker filled with explosive material. are considered to be highly
 harmful; examples such as Stalin had good reason to believe that his enemies were plotting against

 him, and he took the necessary precautions to ensure his rule. are considered as potentially harmful.
 While there is no perfect way to undertake guidance, there may be more structured ways to think

 about guidance and monitoring this is where the conceptual tools from philosophy of science and
 social epistemology can be useful for addressing some of the most important issues.

 A first issue concerns the principles that should guide the development of instructions for evaluators.

 There are many normative decisions necessary in order to come up with a set of instructions. What

 kinds of issues and possible harms should evaluators consider? On the basis of which values? How
 should different categories be prioritised? Looking at these questions from the perspective of

 pluralism and social epistemology does not provide us with concrete answers to these questions.

 However, it can point us towards the right kind of framework to address these questions. Such a

 framework should be pluralistic in the sense that it is sensitive to a multitude of different perspectives
 and values. This idea leads to asking a different question first: Who should decide on the right

 principles for evaluation guidance? Although it is possible for a certain group (let's say IT experts in

 Silicon Valley), to adopt different perspectives and take a certain variety of values into account, there
 are limits to this approach namely the limits of what is conceivable for the group and those resulting

 from deep but implicit differences in the interpretation of certain states of affairs. Conceivability and

 interpretation will, at least to a certain extent, depend on the respective experiences and thus the
 respective social positions represented in any (in this case rather homogeneous) group. A promising

 answer to the question about the who is therefore that principles for instructions should be decided

 by a pluralistic panel representing sufficient diversity of perspectives and values. What sufficient

 
 15 

 

 

 

 
 diversity should entail in detail is, of course, subject to the same challenges as the recruitment issues
 discussed above. In our view, only a pragmatic approach is feasible here, starting with "obvious"

 diversity criteria (age, gender, religion, education, nationality) and expanding them iteratively based

 on experience and stakeholder feedback, especially by marginalised groups affected by epistemic
 injustices (cf. Kay et al. 2024). However, the more perspectives are represented at the table, the more

 mediation and active integration of viewpoints will be required, not least to address the issue of power

 imbalances and epistemic injustice in deliberation processes (Rolin 2021). Hence, modes of

 deliberation will have to be introduced that can help to manage these challenges. Here, we can learn
 from pluralistic ethics panels and similar advisory bodies that have developed tools to deal with the

 same kind of issues (Bschir and Lohse 2022; Nuffield Council on Bioethics n.d.).

 However, even if we can find viable ways to deal with the described challenges, there is one essential

 question (which we already raised with regard to evaluator selection) that remains unanswered: How

 broad should the spectrum of values be that we consider legitimate? Of course, it is possible that
 sexist or racist values will also be represented14 in a truly pluralistic panel deciding on instructions for

 evaluators, whether implicitly or explicitly. We believe that such values should not guide the

 respective instructions for evaluators. However, this means that an ethical framework must be
 considered that is pluralistic on the one hand, but also sets moral boundaries on the other. The

 Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) is a good starting point for this because it represents a

 minimum consensus that is already accepted, at least de jure, by a large number of countries.15 How
 exactly implementation of such an ethically robust framework can succeed, however, is not a trivial

 question. 

 A pluralistic panel could also be responsible for monitoring adherence to the instructions and

 managing deviant behaviour of evaluators. It should, in other words, monitor and fine-tune this
 specific social process of social cognition. There will always be situations in which it is not clear how

 certain decision rules should be interpreted or applied or if evaluators really deviate from guidelines

 in a systematic way or not. This need not be due to malicious (or ignorant) actors, but simply to the
 fact that guidelines cannot cover every possible scenario and that there may be multiple

 interpretations of the rules (Miller and Sultanescu 2022). Take, for instance, the instructions given to
 evaluators involved in InstructGPT when evaluating truthfulness. One of the conditions was that

 
 14 Another issue lies in the risk of harmful data insertion by malicious actors. Here, the main recourse simply lies in
 good screening and monitoring of whether evaluators are correctly following guidelines.
 15 Using the UDHR as a starting point for developing an ethical framework is not without its problems, as its legal and
 ethical interpretation are controversial (Glendon 1998). However, there seems to be no better, less controversial one.
 16 

 

 

 

 
 outputs Not produc[e] clearly false information about the world (e.g. making up facts or promoting
 conspiracies). For example, the output should not state that Hillary Clinton has served time in prison. 

 (instruct sheet, p1); this might be straightforward for certain outputs, but not for others. Further,
 languages and cultural contexts influence how questions are interpreted and answers are structured,

 which can have an impact on RLHF (especially when feedback is given in different languages). Consider
 cases where different and cross-cutting kinship categories exist in different languages (Kemp and

 Regier 2012) which may lead to incommensurable answers to questions about social relationships.

 When systematic rule application/deviance problems arise, it is necessary to make adjustments by

 introducing new rules, clarifying rules or adding examples (see above). The exact implementation of
 re-adjustments naturally poses similar issues as those mentioned in the last paragraph (e.g. Is this

 evaluator mistaken or does s/he have a value base that we didn t consider? ), which is why a
 pluralistic panel makes sense here as well. In this context, the degree of openness in the response

 options available to evaluators should also be considered. The spectrum ranges from simple
 comparisons and rating procedures of LLM responses to procedures that allow the insertion of new

 kinds of responses. The latter is more complex, but at the same time more open to points of view that

 have not yet been considered. This might help to assess responses that require a greater level of finegrainedness (e.g., they might be accurate and helpful but harmful, or harmless and helpful but false).

 Here, textual input from the evaluators would seem to enable a more reasonable approach. But it
 would also be an option to consider a different procedure, i.e. not to ask evaluators for balance, but

 rather to ask certain evaluators for pro-active liberal coding and others for leftist or conservative
 coding. Such an approach would entail explicitly valuing and preserving distinct viewpoints - whether

 liberal, conservative, or otherwise - rather than asking evaluators to temper or moderate their
 positions, thereby preserving the richness and nuance of different worldviews (rather than forcing

 artificial compromise) as well as acknowledging that true balance often emerges not from individual

 neutrality but from the dynamic interaction of multiple well-articulated positions. Furthermore, it may
 lead to more honest and consistent feedback, as evaluators can assess outputs from their genuine

 perspective rather than trying to approximate some notion of neutrality. This could establish a checksand-balance mechanism via pluralistic triangulation in which multiple perspectives pull in different

 directions arguably leading to more epistemically and ethically robust model outputs (see Freiesleben
 and Grote 2023, for various notions of robustness in machine learning). 

 

 
 4.4 Feedback Collection and Aggregation 

 

 17 

 

 

 

 
 An important step in RLHF is the collection and aggregation of individual feedback to enable the
 training of a reward model. The reward model is usually a supervised learning model that can predict

 evaluations. Recall, typical feedback includes binary preferences (i.e. yes or no ; good or bad ) of a
 certain output, giving a score (e.g. from 0 to 7), or ranking several outputs in order of quality. In

 addition, feedback can also involve giving the explicit answer that should have been given, or providing
 an explicit explanation as to why the answer was correct/incorrect. These items are then aggregated

 and used to train a reward model. In the case of binary preferences or rankings the aggregation might

 be straightforward, although there are different aggregation mechanisms which may make a
 difference in the final policy that gets implemented (e.g., ELO rating, majority voting, averaging, etc.).

 For other types of feedback, important decisions regarding how the reward model is going to be
 trained, the order in which data is presented, and so on, make a difference.

 In the case of InstructGPT, labellers ranked multiple model responses to the same prompt, creating

 numerous pairwise comparisons. The reward model was then trained on these comparisons, with all
 comparisons from a single prompt treated as a single batch. This iterative process used new

 comparison data to continuously update the reward model which was then used to train the policy.

 Although early training prioritised helpfulness, final evaluations emphasised truthfulness and
 harmlessness, leaving the resolution of potential conflicts between these criteria for future

 exploration. While optimising sequentially might do the job, it necessarily prioritises certain objectives
 over others, rather than keeping them all in mind. The way the feedback was aggregated, and the

 sequence by which the reward model evolved, raises several important questions when viewed
 through the lens of pluralism and social epistemology. One key issue is how to effectively combine the

 diverse, and potentially conflicting, feedback from evaluators with different backgrounds, expertise,
 and value systems. Disagreement can often signal areas of underlying complexity, ambiguity or

 tension that warrant further investigation. A pluralistic approach to aggregation would seek to

 preserve and engage with these points of contention, rather than erasing them in pursuit of a false
 consensus. This connects to the issue of how to handle conflicts between different alignment criteria,

 such as helpfulness, truthfulness and harmlessness. InstructGPT s strategy of shifting priority from
 helpfulness to truthfulness/harmlessness in later training phases is a rather blunt way of navigating

 these trade-offs. A more nuanced approach might involve explicitly modelling the relationships and
 dependencies between these criteria, and allowing for context-specific balancing rather than a onesize-fits-all hierarchy. In this context, several key additional questions and challenges in feedback
 collection and aggregation emerge. 

 
 One significant issue concerns preserving diverse perspectives during the aggregation process rather
 than cancelling them out or ignoring a subset. This makes it important to find methods that take

 18 

 

 

 

 
 important disagreements and minority viewpoints seriously in a pluralistic process instead of merely
 averaging them into a pseudo consensus. Connectedly, there is the challenge of navigating and

 balancing conflicting viewpoints. A key question is how the reward model can be aligned with, or at
 least take into account, the values of multiple groups holding conflicting or even incompatible

 viewpoints. Although there has been progress, representing diverse societies in reward models is still
 a pressing concern. How can we overcome the limitations of a single reward function in capturing the

 broad spectrum of human preferences, expertise, and capabilities in a diverse society, where current

 methods risk marginalising under-represented groups by treating differences as mere noise, or
 averaging important differences? This issue underscores the need for a reward system that is sensitive

 to diverse values and perspectives. Such an undertaking requires nuanced reward models. These
 models should adequately reflect the relationships and trade-offs among various alignment criteria,

 enabling context-specific adjustments. Such development would allow for a more refined approach to
 handling feedback that considers the complexity of different stakeholders needs and expectations.

 Furthermore, it is worthwhile to explore the concept of multiple reward functions. Moving away from
 the reliance on a singular reward function and instead maintaining multiple models could more

 effectively represent the diverse values of different stakeholders. 

 In addition to these challenges, modelling dynamic human values presents its own set of complexities.

 Human feedback is inherently complex and context-dependent, continuously evolving with time. For
 example, attitudes towards certain countries might change due to geopolitical events (e.g. wars), or

 attitudes towards health or governments might change due to pandemics. This dynamism makes it
 difficult to effectively model with static, lower-dimensional preferences given by humans at a certain

 point in time, such as rankings of outputs. 

 Further iterations of RLHF will filter some of these problems out. However, certain complex issues may

 not improve through this process, or might require a different approach altogether (think for example
 of questions involving the assessment of the Middle East conflict and how RLHF might introduce model

 drift). A possible starting point for thinking differently about feedback aggregation can be seen in a
 notable study by Bakker et al.(2022) on fine-tuning LLMs to generate meaningful consensus

 statements among groups with diverse opinions. This involved creating debate questions using a pretrained LLM on contemporary political and moral issues, followed by data collection and environment

 design where UK-based participants provided their opinions. The study demonstrated the model's
 ability to generate complex consensus statements preferred over LLM-generated and humangenerated alternatives, highlighting the model's sensitivity to individual contributions and robust

 performance with out-of-distribution questions. 

 
 19 

 

 

 

 
 4.5 Moral and Epistemic Trade-offs 

 Finally, we want to look at specific trade-offs in RLHF-assisted AI development. Regarding the type of
 feedback, there are trade-offs among accuracy, speed, and cost. For instance, the choice between

 binary responses and more detailed (pluralistic) feedback from evaluators significantly influences

 these dimensions. Binary responses, while quick and cost-effective, often lack the nuanced
 information that can refine AI behaviour more precisely. Conversely, detailed feedback, although

 richer and potentially more accurate, requires more time from evaluators and incurs higher costs. This
 extended feedback process may slow down the iterative cycles of model training, yet it enriches the

 quality and reliability of the model by providing deeper insights into the evaluators' reasoning and
 perspectives. Balancing these aspects requires careful consideration to optimise the efficiency of the

 RLHF process while maintaining the integrity and depth of the training data. However, we will not
 focus on these trade-offs, but rather concentrate on the ones related to epistemic and moral virtues.

 
 Recent studies have pointed out a concerning trend in GPT-4's performance, particularly in areas
 requiring high precision, like mathematics (J. Chen et al. 2023). For example, in March 2023, GPT-4

 demonstrated an 84% accuracy rate in identifying prime versus composite numbers, a task that
 demands precise mathematical reasoning. However, by June 2023, its accuracy had notably declined

 to just 51%. This diminishing accuracy brings to light questions about the impact of user diversity on
 the model. Does the interaction with a more heterogeneous user base enhance the model s overall

 performance, or does it amplify certain limitations? For instance, if users with varying degrees of
 expertise in a subject interact with the model, it might struggle to maintain a high standard of accuracy

 in that domain, but on the other hand, it might be able to interact with the subject at different levels
 of difficulty and abstraction. Possibly a comparison and pluralistic triangulation of different user

 responses can help here. However, such a process - perhaps even organised in a discursive format naturally involves efficiency trade-offs. 

 Further complicating this dynamic, a study by (K. Chen et al. 2024) evaluates how GPT-3 interacts with
 diverse socio-demographic groups concerning sensitive topics like climate change and the Black Lives

 Matter movement. The findings reveal a nuanced landscape where conversational styles and user
 experiences correlate significantly with the users' background, potentially indicating biases in the

 model s responses. This is particularly evident as users from lower educational backgrounds and
 opinion minority groups report poorer experiences. Is this the result of the evaluators that were

 involved in RLHF? (recall that for InstructGPT, more than 85% of the evaluators had at least a university

 degree). 

 

 20 

 

 

 

 
 This dilemma underscores a potential trade-off between the epistemic and moral dimensions of AI
 development. On one hand, moral considerations advocate for a diverse range of feedback to ensure

 the model s alignment with a broad spectrum of human values and perspectives. On the other hand,
 epistemic virtues like accuracy and reliability might be compromised if the feedback providers lack

 domain-specific expertise. This tension necessitates a deeper philosophical inquiry into the objectives
 and methodologies of RLHF and prompts a re-evaluation of the balance between user satisfaction and

 (scientific) accuracy in the model s training objectives, among other things.

 Furthermore, the interaction of diversity with model alignment and response generation introduces

 additional complexity. One of the places where this can be seen most clearly is in certain
 manifestations of model drift, particularly in systems that undergo continuous refinement and realworld applications. This phenomenon occurs when a model's performance and behaviour degrade
 over time due to shifts in underlying data, changes in the real-world context it is applied to, updates

 to the model itself, or as a consequence of RLHF. For instance, RLHF can introduce drift through the
 biases and preferences of the evaluators, particularly if they hold strong moral or ethical views that

 may not be universally shared or may become less prevalent over time. For instance, a language model

 trained up to a certain year might not only miss later developments but also reflect dated or skewed
 moral perspectives if the feedback mechanism doesn't account for evolving societal norms. This form

 of drift not only impacts the model's accuracy and reliability but also its relevance and fairness, as the
 AI might produce outputs that are misaligned with current or emerging societal values.

 In addition to model drift, a related problem that may occur through progressive rounds of RLHF is

 that of catastrophic forgetting, where neural networks trained sequentially on different tasks tend to
 forget earlier tasks as they learn new ones. Kirkpatrick et al. (2017) show that techniques such as

 elastic weight consolidation protect important weights for previously learned tasks by constraining

 their plasticity. This could be to some extent imported within the design of the RLHF flow, with an eye
 on protecting the influence of high-quality early feedback by explicitly weighting or constraining

 updates based on feedback quality metrics. Another complementary approach would be to
 continually reintroduce high-quality feedback, effectively maintaining a balance between carefully

 curated feedback and newer (cheaper), potentially noisier user interactions. This hybrid approach
 might help maintain model performance while still allowing for adaptation to changing user needs and

 contexts. 

 These observations show one thing above all, namely that the way the social cognition process is

 structured in the case of RHLF and decisions regarding the balancing of different epistemic and moral

 

 21 

 

 

 

 
 values is anything but trivial - but it may have a major impact on the kind of answers we can expect
 from an evolving LLM. 

 While our discussion focuses on improving RLHF for large-scale models like the ones underlying

 ChatGPT, it's worth noting that the future landscape will likely feature multiple specialized models

 catering to different contexts, cultures, and use cases. However, market dynamics and network effects
 tend to create Schelling points - as we currently see with ChatGPT's role as a de facto standard for

 most LLM interactions. Even in a diverse ecosystem of AI models, certain ones will likely emerge as
 widely-used daily tools for a significant portion of the global population. This reality makes the case

 for pluralistic RLHF particularly pressing for these broadly-adopted models. Moreover, even models
 catered to specific cultural contexts or applications would benefit from the pluralistic approaches

 outlined in this paper, as they too will likely require handling diversity of perspective and value tradeoffs within their target domains and scope. 

 

 
 5. Conclusion: Enhancing RLHF 
 In this article, we have set out the advantages of pluralistic RLHF and underpinned them with

 arguments from social epistemology and pluralist philosophy of science. We argued for increasing
 evaluator diversity, optimising guidance for heterogeneous evaluator responses, and modifying the

 approach to feedback aggregation, among other things however, we also emphasised challenges for
 more pluralism in RLHF. While these challenges cannot all be overcome equally well, we have sketched

 a few possible ways for addressing them.16 We conclude with an agenda for change, i.e. concrete,
 actionable steps, to improve LLM development. 

 
 In our view, the following steps are the most important and feasible starting points for advancing
 the pluralisation of RHLF: 

 

 (1) Representation. LLM developers must address issues of adequate representation of epistemic

 perspectives and ethical values in the selection of evaluators more explicitly than before and

 negotiate these in a transparent process. This will need to include discussions about the
 spectrum of values that are considered legitimate and ideally the development of an ethical

 framework that reflects the outcomes of these discussions. In doing this, developers should

 

 16 Beyond LLMs, similar challenges and opportunities in pluralistic RLHF may arise in other fields such as robotics
 (potentially improving accessibility for disabled individuals), autonomous vehicles, game development (enhancing
 non-player character interactions), and personalised education. 
 22 

 

 

 

 
 leverage stakeholder participation methods to include diverse, and in particular marginalised,
 voices throughout the process. 

 (2) Guidance. LLM developers should establish pluralistic panels representing a diversity of

 perspectives and values to jointly decide on the principles for evaluation guidance and

 monitoring the feedback process. This should be done in an iterative way where additional
 (and especially minority) perspectives can be added to the panel as appropriate. In order to

 establish such a panel, a democratic mode of deliberation must be developed that enables an
 open exchange of viewpoints and is pragmatically feasible at the same time. An ethical

 framework like the one mentioned under (1) could serve as a scaffold for this deliberation.

 (3) Feedback. LLM developers should experiment more with feedback formats that are capable
 of preserving different perspectives and conflicting viewpoints (allowing for negotiation and

 contestation) rather than turning them into superficial pseudo consensus. This entails

 fundamentally rethinking how to balance feedback collection: rather than asking individual
 evaluators to provide balanced or neutral feedback, the idea would be to actively seek out

 and preserve distinct perspectives and authentic viewpoints, whereby the balance would
 emerge from the multiplicity of perspectives rather than from individual restraint. This could,

 for instance, be achieved by creating platforms where evaluators with different perspectives
 engage in interactive discussions and collective revisions of their evaluations, using methods

 such as Delphi techniques or iterative feedback to develop more complex positions, especially
 when initial opinions differ significantly.17 

 
 (4) Aggregation. Ultimately, the challenge is to develop reward models that see diversity of
 values and standpoints as a resource rather than treating it as a problem to be minimised. This

 may require a rethinking of established methods for creating reward models. LLM developers

 should address this challenge by developing and testing more nuanced reward models. They
 could, for instance, explore and improve the usability of weighted feedback aggregation

 approaches that prioritise the input of evaluators based on their context-specific expertise
 and trustworthiness. This might involve experimenting with reputation systems, peer-review

 mechanisms, or criteria that account for an evaluator s background and qualifications,

 

 

 
 17 Such an approach would improve inclusivity of viewpoints and also align with Longino s (1990) and Douglas (2009)
 notion of interactive objectivity, discussed in Section 3, where the right kind of social organisation of the process
 enhances the epistemic robustness and credibility of the outcome. 
 23 

 

 

 

 
 ensuring that more credible feedback (relative to the task at hand) has a greater impact on
 the outcomes.18 

 
 As we have shown, insufficient pluralism is problematic for RLHF on epistemic and ethical grounds.
 Ultimately, however, the problem is much more far-reaching, as biased and under-complex LLMs,

 once fully integrated into social media, journalism and other key areas of public discourse, have
 the potential to negatively influence this discourse on a massive level and ultimately jeopardise

 democracy. Thus, even if the changes we propose prove insufficient or pragmatically unfeasible,
 we believe they should be carefully considered and, if necessary, modified or replaced with better

 ideas and approaches. One way or another, the pluralisation of RLHF will be crucial for the

 development of more humanistic LLMs and hence for safeguarding public discourse.

 

 
 References 

 Bai, Yuntao, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones, Anna
 Chen, et al. 2022. Constitutional AI: Harmlessness from AI Feedback . doi:10.48550/arXiv.2212.08073.

 Bakker, Michiel, Martin Chadwick, Hannah Sheahan, Michael Tessler, Lucy Campbell-Gillingham, Jan
 Balaguer, Nat McAleese, et al. 2022. Fine-Tuning Language Models to Find Agreement Among
 Humans with Diverse Preferences . Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35: 38176 89.
 Barman, Kristian Gonzalez, Sascha Caron, Tom Claassen, and Henk de Regt. 2024. Towards a

 Benchmark for Scientific Understanding in Humans and Machines . Minds and Machines 34(1): 1 16.
 doi:10.1007/s11023-024-09657-1. 
 Bender, Emily M., Timnit Gebru, Angelina McMillan-Major, and Shmargaret Shmitchell. 2021. On the

 Dangers of Stochastic Parrots: Can Language Models Be Too Big? . In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM
 Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, 610 23. Virtual Event Canada: ACM.
 https://doi.org/10.1145/3442188.3445922. 

 Bengio, Yoshua, Geoffrey Hinton, Andrew Yao, Dawn Song, Pieter Abbeel, Trevor Darrell, Yuval Noah
 Harari, et al. 2024. Managing Extreme AI Risks amid Rapid Progress . Science 384(6698): 842 45.
 doi:10.1126/science.adn0117. 

 

 18 There may also be promising technical approaches. Rather than simple averaging, which may lead to pseudoconsensus, probabilistic models could capture the full distribution of individual preferences. For instance, Bayesian
 approaches like Gaussian processes could model distributions over individual rewards or even over entire reward
 functions (Biyik et al., 2020; Binois et al., 2021). This, in theory, could preserve the multi-modal nature of preferences
 rather than collapsing them (although in some cases practical implementations may struggle with high-dimensional
 multi-modal distributions). Similarly, the challenge of balancing different criteria (like truthfulness and harmlessness)
 need not rely on sequential optimization. Instead, multi-objective optimization techniques could identify different
 optimal solutions (e.g., the Pareto front), making trade-offs explicit and allowing for context-dependent balancing
 based on the relative scale of different desiderata (Chiandussi et al., 2012; Gaudrie et al., 2018; Paria et al., 2018;
 Calandra & Peters, 2014). 
 24 

 

 

 

 
 Bethlehem, Jelke. 2010. Selection Bias in Web Surveys . International Statistical Review 78(2): 161 
 88. doi:10.1111/j.1751-5823.2010.00112.x. 

 Binois, M., Habbal, A., & Picheny, V. (2023). A Game Theoretic Perspective on Bayesian Many-Objective
 Optimization. In Many-Criteria Optimization and Decision Analysis: State-of-the-Art, Present
 Challenges, and Future Perspectives (pp. 299-316). Cham: Springer International Publishing.

 B y k, E., Huynh, N., Kochenderfer, M. J., & Sadigh, D. (2024). Active preference-based Gaussian process
 regression for reward learning and optimization. The International Journal of Robotics Research, 43(5),
 665-684. 
 Brennan, J., & Landemore, H. (2022). Debating democracy: Do we need more or less?. Oxford

 University Press. 
 Bschir, Karim, and Simon Lohse. 2022. Pandemics, Policy, and Pluralism: A Feyerabend-Inspired
 Perspective on COVID-19 . Synthese 200(6): 441. doi:10.1007/s11229-022-03923-4.

 Calandra, R., Peters, J., & Deisenrothy, M. P. (2014). Pareto front modeling for sensitivity analysis in
 multi-objective bayesian optimization. In NIPS Workshop on Bayesian Optimization (Vol. 5).

 Casper, Stephen, Xander Davies, Claudia Shi, Thomas Krendl Gilbert, J r my Scheurer, Javier Rando,
 Rachel Freedman, et al. 2023. Open Problems and Fundamental Limitations of Reinforcement
 Learning from Human Feedback . doi:10.48550/arXiv.2307.15217. 

 Chen, Jin, Zheng Liu, Xu Huang, Chenwang Wu, Qi Liu, Gangwei Jiang, Yuanhao Pu, et al. 2023. When
 Large Language Models Meet Personalization: Perspectives of Challenges and Opportunities .
 doi:10.48550/arXiv.2307.16376. 

 Chen, Kaiping, Anqi Shao, Jirayu Burapacheep, and Yixuan Li. 2024. Conversational AI and Equity
 through Assessing GPT-3 s Communication with Diverse Social Groups on Contentious Topics |
 Scientific Reports . Scientific Reports 14(1): 1561. doi:10.1038/s41598-024-51969-w.

 Chiandussi, G., Codegone, M., Ferrero, S., & Varesio, F. E. (2012). Comparison of multi-objective
 optimization methodologies for engineering applications. Computers & Mathematics with
 Applications, 63(5), 912-942. 

 Christiano, Paul F, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. 2017. Deep
 Reinforcement Learning from Human Preferences . In Advances in Neural Information Processing
 Systems, Curran Associates, Inc. 
 https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2017/hash/d5e2c0adad503c91f91df240d0cd4e49
 -Abstract.html (January 22, 2024). 

 Douglas, Heather. 2009. Science, Policy, and the Value-Free Ideal. University of Pittsburgh Pre.

 El-Mhamdi, El-Mahdi, Sadegh Farhadkhani, Rachid Guerraoui, Nirupam Gupta, L -Nguy n Hoang,
 Rafael Pinot, S bastien Rouault, and John Stephan. 2023. On the Impossible Safety of Large AI
 Models . doi:10.48550/arXiv.2209.15259. 

 Feyerabend, Paul. 1975. Against Method. Outline of an Anarchistic Theory of Knowledge. London: NLB.
 Feyerabend, Paul. 1999. Outline of a Pluralistic Theory of Knowledge and Action . In Knowledge,

 Science, and Relativism. Philosophical Papers Vol. 3, ed. John Preston. New York, NY: Cambridge
 University Press, 104 11. 

 
 25 

 

 

 

 
 Freiesleben, Timo, and Thomas Grote. 2023. Beyond Generalization: A Theory of Robustness in
 Machine Learning . Synthese 202(4): 109. doi:10.1007/s11229-023-04334-9.

 Gaudrie, D., Le Riche, R., Picheny, V., Enaux, B., & Herbert, V. (2020). Targeting solutions in Bayesian
 multi-objective optimization: sequential and batch versions. Annals of Mathematics and Artificial
 Intelligence, 88, 187-212. 

 Glendon, Mary Ann. 1998. Knowing the Universal Declaration of Human Rights . Notre Dame
 Law Review 73 (5): 1153 90. 
 Grasswick, Heidi. 2018. Feminist Social Epistemology . In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall
 2018 Edition), ed. Edward N. Zalta. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

 https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2018/entries/feminist-social-epistemology/ (October 5,
 2023). 
 Grote, Thomas. 2024. 'Machine Learning in Healthcare and the Methodological Priority of

 Epistemology over Ethics'. Inquiry, 1-30. 
 https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/0020174X.2024.2312207 
 Haraway, Donna J. 1984. Primatology Is Politics by Other Means . PSA: Proceedings of the Biennial

 Meeting of the Philosophy of Science Association 1984(2): 488 524. 
 doi:10.1086/psaprocbienmeetp.1984.2.192523. 
 Harding, Sandra. 1996. Rethinking Standpoint Epistemology: What Is Strong Objectivity ? In
 Feminism And Science, eds. Evelyn Fox Keller and Helen E Longino. Oxford: Oxford University Press,

 235 48. doi:10.1093/oso/9780198751458.003.0016. 
 Henry, Peter, Christian Vollmer, Brian Ferris, and Dieter Fox. 2010. Proceedings - IEEE International
 Conference on Robotics and Automation Learning to Navigate Through Crowded Environments.

 doi:10.1109/ROBOT.2010.5509772. 
 Hicks, Michael Townsen, James Humphries, and Joe Slater. 2024. ChatGPT Is Bullshit . Ethics and
 Information Technology 26(2): 38. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10676-024-09775-5.

 Hoyningen-Huene, Paul. 2023. Objectivity, Value-Free Science, and Inductive Risk . European Journal
 for Philosophy of Science 13(1): 14. doi:10.1007/s13194-023-00518-9. 

 Intemann, Kristen. 2010. 25 Years of Feminist Empiricism and Standpoint Theory: Where Are We
 Now? Hypatia 25(4): 778 96. doi:10.1111/j.1527-2001.2010.01138.x. 

 Kay, Jackie, Atoosa Kasirzadeh, and Shakir Mohamed. 2024. Epistemic Injustice in Generative AI .
 https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2408.11441 

 Kemp, Charles, and Terry Regier. 2012. Kinship Categories Across Languages Reflect General
 Communicative Principles . Science 336(6084): 1049 54. doi:10.1126/science.1218811.
 Kirkpatrick, J., Pascanu, R., Rabinowitz, N., Veness, J., Desjardins, G., Rusu, A. A., ... & Hadsell, R. (2017).

 Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in neural networks. Proceedings of the national academy of
 sciences, 114(13), 3521-3526. 
 Kuhn, Thomas S. 1977. 'Objectivity, value judgment, and theory choice'. In: The Essential Tension, 320-

 339. Chicago: University of Chicago Press 

 

 26 

 

 

 

 
 Landemore, H. (2013). Deliberation, cognitive diversity, and democratic inclusiveness: an epistemic
 argument for the random selection of representatives. Synthese, 190, 1209-1231.

 Li, Haoran, Dadi Guo, Wei Fan, Mingshi Xu, Jie Huang, Fanpu Meng, and Yangqiu Song. 2023. Multi-
 Step Jailbreaking Privacy Attacks on ChatGPT . doi:10.48550/arXiv.2304.05197.
 Lloyd, Elisabeth A. 1997. Feyerabend, Mill, and Pluralism . Philosophy of Science 64: S396 407.

 Longino, Helen E. 1990. Science as Social Knowledge: Values and Objectivity in Scientific Inquiry.
 Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 

 Massimi, Michela. 2022. Perspectival Realism. Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press.

 Metz, Cade. 2023. The Secret Ingredient of ChatGPT Is Human Advice . The New York Times.
 https://www.nytimes.com/2023/09/25/technology/chatgpt-rlhf-human-tutors.html (January 19,
 2024). 

 Miller, Alexander, and Olivia Sultanescu. 2022. Rule-Following and Intentionality . In (Summer 2022
 Edition), ed. Edward N. Zalta. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.
 https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2022/entries/rule-following/ (June 6, 2024).

 Motoki, Fabio, Valdemar Pinho Neto, and Victor Rodrigues. 2023 More Human than Human:
 Measuring ChatGPT Political Bias . Public Choice 198: 3 23. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11127-023-
 01097-2. 

 Ng, A. Y., & Russell, S. (2000, June). Algorithms for inverse reinforcement learning. In Icml (Vol. 1, No.
 2, p. 2). 
 Nuffield Council on Bioethics. Making Ethics Matter Strategic Direction 2024-2028 .

 OpenAI, Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni
 Aleman, et al. 2023. GPT-4 Technical Report . doi:10.48550/arXiv.2303.08774.

 Ouyang, Long, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang,
 et al. 2022. Training Language Models to Follow Instructions with Human Feedback .
 doi:10.48550/arXiv.2203.02155. 

 Perez, Ethan, Sam Ringer, Kamil Luko i t , Karina Nguyen, Edwin Chen, Scott Heiner, Craig Pettit, et
 al. 2022. Discovering Language Model Behaviors with Model-Written Evaluations .
 doi:10.48550/arXiv.2212.09251. 

 Rolin, Kristina H. (2021). Objectivity, trust and social responsibility. Synthese, 199(1), 513 533.
 https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-020-02669-1 

 Rooney, Phyllis. 2017. The Borderlands Between Epistemic and Non-Epistemic Values . In Current
 Controversies in Values and Science, Routledge. 

 Thompson, A. (2014). An Example of the Misuse of Mathematics in the Social Sciences. Mathematics
 Uygun Tun , Duygu. 2023. The Subject of Knowledge in Collaborative Science . Synthese 201(3): 88.
 doi:10.1007/s11229-023-04080-y. 

 Yamagata, Taku, Ryan McConville, and Raul Santos-Rodriguez. 2021. Reinforcement Learning with
 Feedback from Multiple Humans with Diverse Skills . doi:10.48550/arXiv.2111.08596.

 

 27 

 

 

 

 
 Ziegler, Daniel M., Nisan Stiennon, Jeffrey Wu, Tom B. Brown, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, Paul
 Christiano, and Geoffrey Irving. 2020. Fine-Tuning Language Models from Human Preferences .
 doi:10.48550/arXiv.1909.08593. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 28