Using Large Language Models to Provide 
 Explanatory Feedback to Human Tutors 

 
 Jionghao Lin1,2, Danielle R. Thomas1, Feifei Han3, Shivang Gupta1, Wei Tan2,
 Ngoc Dang Nguyen2, and Kenneth R. Koedinger1 

 1 Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA 
 {Jionghao,Drthomas,Shivang,Koedinger}@cmu.edu 
 2 Monash University, Clayton, VIC, Australia 
 {wei.tan2,dan.nguyen2}@monash.edu 
 3 University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada 
 feifei.han@mail.utoronto.ca 

 Abstract. Research demonstrates learners engaging in the process of
 producing explanations to support their reasoning, can have a positive
 impact on learning. However, providing learners real-time explanatory
 feedback often presents challenges related to classification accuracy, particularly in domain-specific environments, containing situationally complex and nuanced responses. We present two approaches for supplying
 tutors real-time feedback within an online lesson on how to give students
 effective praise. This work-in-progress demonstrates considerable accuracy in binary classification for corrective feedback of effective, or effortbased (F score = 0.811), and ineffective, or outcome-based (F score =
 1 1 
 0.350), praise responses. More notably, we introduce progress towards
 an enhanced approach of providing explanatory feedback using large
 language model-facilitated named entity recognition, which can provide
 tutors feedback, not only while engaging in lessons, but can potentially
 suggest real-time tutor moves. Future work involves leveraging large language models for data augmentation to improve accuracy, while also
 developing an explanatory feedback interface. 
 Keywords: Large Language Models Named Entity Recognition Tutor Training Explanatory Feedback Natural Language Processing
 1 Introduction 
 Tutoring is among the most highly adaptable and consistently successful interventions to increase student learning [10, 17]. However, despite the known
 positive impacts of tutoring on achievement, there is a lack of qualified and
 skilled tutors outside of private, high-income communities, ready to provide
 content and socio-motivational support to students [10]. Due to the shortage
 of professional tutors, often certified teachers and paraprofessionals, the focus
 has shifted to preparing novice tutors, such as community volunteers, retired
 adults, and college students [17]. The demand for professional development personalized to meet the needs of nonprofessional and novice tutors is high [17],
 3202 
 nuJ 
 72 
 ]LC.sc[ 
 1v89451.6032:viXra 

 

 

 

 

 2 Lin et al. 

 with training on social-emotional learning, relationship building, and attending to student motivation and self-efficacy as common topics requested among
 unskilled tutors [21]. Online, scenario-based lessons on these topics have been
 developed to provide situational experiences to inexperienced tutors [21] and preservice teachers [22]. The ability to administer real-time explanatory feedback
 within constructed-response questions dealing with common tutoring scenarios
 (e.g., a student struggling with motivation) is powerful. Immediate feedback on
 errors, similar to the feedback received while engaging in the deliberate practice
 of responding to situational judgment tests, is described as a favorable learning
 condition, supporting learning [9, p. 5]. 
 We present a method of providing tutors real-time explanatory feedback harnessing large language models (LLMs). Our approach employs a template-based
 strategy leveraging named entity recognition (NER), a subtask of natural language processing, that classifies similar pieces of information [12]. By tagging
 similar pieces of information, called named entities (NEs), for effective and ineffective tutor responses, NER becomes a suitable and viable method for delivering
 tutors feedback. For example, classifying desired and less-desired tutor responses
 on how to effectively praise students yields the following NEs: praising for effort,
 or process-focused praise (Effort); ability- or outcome-focused praise (Outcome);
 and person-based praise (Person). Using NER, segments of tutor responses can
 be systematically identified aligning with the appropriate NEs. For instance, in
 Fig. 1 the tutor response Good job! You got the right answer, and you stuck with
 it tags tutor utterances to produce the following NEs: Good job (Outcome)
 and stuck with it (Effort). Tagged NEs can be used to create the corresponding
 templated feedback: Saying [insert Effort] is a nice example of process-focused
 praise, which praises students for their effort. Conversely, templated feedback
 for a less-desired response could be: Saying [insert Outcome] is praising students
 for the outcome. You should focus on praising the students for their effort and
 process towards learning. Do you want to try responding again? The researchrecommended approach, representing the desired tutor response and, commonly
 observed, less-desired responses can be tagged to corresponding NEs. By tagging pieces of information, aligning with tutoring approaches for responding to

 

 

 

 

 Fig.1. An example of providing a tutor templated feedback that does not contain the
 desire responses of praising students for their efforts. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Automatic Explanatory Feedback to Human Tutors 3 

 the given scenarios, NER becomes a suitable method for generating templated
 feedback to tutors. 
 Automatic short answer grading, or the process of automatically scoring
 learner answers to constructed-responses questions (often applying several machine learning models), has received notable attention due to advances in AIbased technologies [24]. Most automatic short answer grading methods follow a
 two-step approach: 1) using a representation, or training set, of learner responses
 to train the model, using natural language processing methods, and 2) labeling
 responses via a machine learning classifier to predict the learner s score or performance [24]. Presently, advanced approaches using LLMs to process learner
 responses are taking precedence over traditional, human-identified feature analysis [24]. Despite the advantages to using LLMs, there are several limitations:
 the model not being well-adapted for the nuanced and varied responses among
 the learner population; the requirement of having to train one model per question, with related or follow-up questions being treated as mutually exclusive
 [24]; and, the need for a large number of tutor responses in the representation
 dataset. This workshop paper presents a method of providing corrective and explanatory feedback to tutors participating in an online lesson on giving students
 effective praise. This work-in-progress introduces an ongoing effort to enhance
 approaches towards automatic short answer grading using LLMs, enabling NER
 for identifying relevant components of a tutor response. The primary research
 questions addressed, include: 
 RQ1: Can we apply a binary classification method for effectively labeling tutor
 responses, as effective or ineffective, to provide corrective feedback?
 RQ2: How can we enhance past approaches of providing explanatory feedback
 using LLM-facilitated named entity recognition to administer templated
 feedback identifying relevant parts of the tutor response? 
 2 Related Work 

 2.1 Feedback Generation 
 Feedback can have a profound impact on learning and achievement; however,
 its influence may be beneficial or detrimental to learning depending on type
 and delivery [7, 19, 13]. Feedback is most beneficial within the learning context, delivered after the learner has engaged with the initial instruction, and
 when addressing misconceptions or faulty reasoning [7]. Immediate, explanatory
 feedback, or feedback detailing the reasoning why a response is desired or not,
 assists learners with participating in deliberate practice. The online lesson has
 tutors engaging in the deliberate practice of responding to a common tutoring
 scenario (i.e., a student struggling to stay motivated) by asking them how to
 best respond. Tutors then explain their reasoning and observe the most-desired
 approach receiving feedback on their chosen selected response option [3, 21].
 An expansion of this previous work is to provide explanatory feedback to tutors on their textual replies to the constructed-response questions. Generating

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 4 Lin et al. 

 explanatory feedback to tutors using enhanced approaches, such as using LLMfacilitated NER, shows promise as a method of providing accurate and timely
 feedback to tutors. The creation of templated feedback, including specific references to desired and less-desired elements of the tutor responses, is influenced by
 earlier results on the effectiveness of having a rich, data-driven error diagnosis
 taxonomy driving template-based feedback [1]. 

 2.2 Named Entity Recognition 

 A named entity (NE) is a word or phrase distinct from a set of words that
 have similar attributes [12]. For example, in the text John said that Pittsburgh
 is wonderful in the winter , John , Pittsburgh , and winter are considered
 NEs, which represent a person, location, and time, respectively. Named entity
 recognition (NER) is a fundamental task in natural language processing, which
 aims to automatically locate NE in the text and classify them into different
 categories such as person, organization, and location [12]. In the example, to
 identify the NE Pittsburgh , a NER model first locates the position of Pittsburgh in the text and then classifies the entity Pittsburgh into the category
 of location. As discussed by [12], there are two primary categories of name entities: (i) generic (e.g., person and organization) and (ii) domain-specific (e.g.,
 enzymes and genes). Since the present work aims to investigate the potential
 of the NER model in providing explanatory feedback based on learning principles in the previous research [21], we focus on the domain-specific NER model
 scheme. In the educational domain, researchers have conducted NER for automatic text assessment [23]. However, the use of the NER model is rarely used in
 feedback generation. Therefore, our approach aims to employ a NE recognition
 model to highlight the NEs within tutors responses, which can be used to create
 templated explanatory feedback to tutors to increase tutor learning.
 3 Method 
 3.1 Dataset 
 The dataset consisted of tutor responses to constructed-response questions within
 the Giving Effective Praise lesson, comprising a total of 65 volunteer tutors. The
 tutor demographics are: 52% White, 18% Asian, 52% male, and slightly more
 than half are reportedly 50 years of age or older. The development of Giving Effective Praise involved collaboration between the tutoring organization s director
 and researchers to ensure accurate operationalization of effective praise strategies within the tutoring environment. Lesson scenarios were chosen to enhance
 face validity by aligning with typical situations encountered by tutors in the field
 [21]. Giving Effective Praise aims to support tutors with increasing student motivation by providing effective praise, identifying its key features, and employing
 strategies to deliver praise and feedback. In accordance with the lesson s construct, effective praise should be: (1) sincere, earned, and truthful; (2) specific
 by giving details of a student s strengths; (3) immediate, with praise given right

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Automatic Explanatory Feedback to Human Tutors 5 

 after the student s action; (4) authentic, avoiding repetitive phrases like great
 job which diminishes meaning and becomes predictable, and (5) focused on the
 learning process rather than innate ability [21]. 
 Based on characteristics of praise types in the literature, tutor praise statements can be categorized into three different types: effort-based (Effort), outcomebased (Outcome), and person-based (Person). Effort-based praise is a researchshown productive praise type, focusing on the learning process (e.g., I like
 how you worked hard to... ). Outcome-based praise showcases student s achievements, such as getting an A on an assignment or getting a problem correct,
 and is often, but not always, associated with unproductive praise (e.g., Great
 job! ). Person-based praise suggests student s success is caused from fixed qualities outside of student s control (e.g., You are so talented. ) and, similar to
 outcome-based praise, is often associated with unproductive praise [8].
 The Giving Effective Praise dataset contains 129 tutor responses categorized
 by praise type. Because only one person-based praise statement (i.e., You are
 very smart ) was identified from the dataset, person-based praise was not included in the analysis. It should be noted that a tutor s response can include
 more than one praise type. For example, the statement, Great job! I like how
 you worked hard on completing that task, encompasses outcome- and effortbased praise statements. Similarly, a tutor response may not contain any praise
 types such as, Let s work together. 
 3.2 RQ 1: Binary Classification for Corrective Feedback 
 To accurately identify different types of praise, we aim to conduct multi-label
 classification. Relying on the praise framework proposed by [21], we recruited
 an educational expert to annotate each type of praise for the tutor s responses
 in a binary form. The distribution of annotated praise in tutor responses are as
 follows: 52 responses contained effort-based praise only; 29 responses contained
 both effort- and outcome-based praise; 26 contained outcome-based praise only;
 and, the remaining 22 responses lacked any mention of neither effort or outcomebased praise. Then, we trained the annotated responses on classifiers. Inspired
 by the effectiveness of the BERT model on the educational classification tasks
 such as tutoring dialogue classification [14, 15], we employed the BERT model
 to identify each type of praise in the tutors responses. To train and evaluate the
 BERT model, we randomly split the dataset (i.e., annotated tutor responses) into
 training, validation, and testing set in the ratio of 70%, 10%, 20%, respectively,
 as suggested by [6]. The classification performance of the BERT model was
 measured by accuracy and F1 score. 
 3.3 RQ 2: Named Entity Recognition to Generate Explanatory 
 Feedback 

 In order to generate explanatory feedback to tutors, firstly, the categorization
 of relevant parts of responses need to be identified through use of NEs. We
 refer to the annotation scheme by Thomas et al. [21] introduced previously and

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 6 Lin et al. 

 annotate the NEs representing attributes associated with Effort and Outcome,
 for 129 tutor responses. In line with the NER annotation in previous works
 [12, 16], we apply the same BIO-tagging scheme to this present work, that is, B
 represents the beginning position of the NE in the text, I represents the inside
 position of the NE in the text, and O represents outside of NE. For example,
 when annotating praise NEs for a tutor s praise You are doing a great job ,
 the word great is identified as the beginning (i.e., B ) of the NE Outcome
 out 
 and job is identified inside (i.e., I ) of the NE. The remaining text in the
 out 
 response is identified as the outside (i.e., O) of the NE. After annotating the NEs
 for each tutor s response, we employed the BERT model to identify the NE from
 the tutors responses. The dataset (annotated with NEs) was also divided into
 training, validation, and testing set in the ratio of 70%:10%:20%, respectively.
 The statistics of NER annotation data are shown in Table 1 which presents O
 as the major tag in our dataset. Informed by the previous study [16], predicting
 O would not enhance the evaluation score of the NER model, our study also
 did not take accurate predictions on O when calculating the performance score.
 To measure the NER model performance, we used the F1 score in line with the
 recent works on NER task [12, 16]. 
 Table 1. Distribution of named entities for each dataset by praise types.
 % Annotation (B/I/O) 
 O B-Outcome I-Outcome B-Effort I-Effort 
 Full 2380 (76.5%) 53 (1.7%) 114 (3.7%) 80 (2.6%) 484 (15.6%) 
 Training 1661 (76.5%) 38 (1.8%) 75 (3.5%) 58 (2.7%) 338 (15.6%) 

 Validation 226 (75.6%) 6 (2.0%) 19 (6.4%) 6 (2.0%) 42 (14.0%) 
 Testing 493 (76.8%) 9 (1.4%) 20 (3.1%) 16 (2.5%) 104 (16.2%) 

 

 4 Results 

 4.1 RQ1: Identifying the correct type of praise 
 First, a multi-label classification was implemented by using the case-sensitive
 BERT base model1 [4] to identify the effective type (i.e., Effort and Outcome)
 of praise from tutor responses. To minimize the potential impact of random
 variation, the model was trained on 10 different random seeds and performance
 was evaluated using the classification of identifying each type of praise. Table
 2 illustrated the effectiveness of the BERT model in accurately tagging Effort,
 demonstrating notably high performance with an average classification accuracy
 1 https://huggingface.co/bert-base-cased 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Automatic Explanatory Feedback to Human Tutors 7 

 of 0.731 and F1 score of 0.811. The results indicated that the BERT model
 could effectively tag Effort, which could further help the provision of corrective
 feedback to inform the novice tutors on providing effort-based praise. However,
 the BERT model s performance in tagging Outcome was less successful. The
 average F1 score for recognizing Outcome was 0.350 with a standard deviation
 of 0.235. As described the distribution of annotated praise in Section 3.2, the
 number of tutor responses tagging Outcome might be inadequate for the BERT
 model to identify the responses containing Outcome accurately. Additionally,
 the standard deviation of classification performance for tagging Outcome (SD =
 0.235) was four times larger compared to the standard deviation of tagging Effort
 (SD = 0.046). The possible explanation for this could be the inadequate number
 of Outcome instances in the test set. Thus, future studies should annotate more
 tutor responses labeling Outcome to improve the BERT model s performance.

 Table 2. Classification performance of BERT model in identifying praise type. The
 results show the average performance taken from ten random seeds. Standard errors
 from these experiments are indicated with subscripts. 
 Praise type Accuracy F1 Score 

 Effort 0.731 0.811 
 0.077 0.046 
 Outcome 0.596 0.350 
 0.089 0.235 

 4.2 RQ 2: Identifying and labeling praise statements in tutor 
 responses 

 The BERT model was employed in using the NER approach. To mitigate random variation, 10 different random seeds were used to evaluate performance of
 the NER model, ensuring reliable estimations of the model s performance. The
 average F1 score of the model was 0.202 and the standard deviation was 0.039,
 with the model effectively identifying certain praise entities. Table 3 presented
 examples of tutor responses with labeled utterances associated with the corresponding NE, displaying Effort, (highlighted in blue) and Outcome (highlighted
 in red). Case 1 showed that the model could accurately identify the location of
 the praise in the text (i.e., the text highlighted in blue) and predict the accurate
 entity type (i.e., Effort). Then, the model failed to annotate the NEs for some
 responses (e.g., Case 2 in Table 3). It should be noted that the classification performance of the NER model still had space to improve the performance. One of
 the major reasons was that the annotated dataset was limited or low-resourced
 [15, 16]. The model might not have a sufficient dataset to train and test the
 model performance. In Section 5.2, we summarized two solutions to enhance
 the NER model s performance: i) data augmentation approaches; ii) and AUC
 Maximization approaches. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 8 Lin et al. 

 Table 3. Examples of tutor responses from the test dataset, along with named entity
 prediction. True and Pred stand for the true and predicted named entity, respectively.
 Notice in Case 2, the failure of the predicted model to annotate the statement associated with Outcome, possibly attributed to a limited or low-resourced dataset.
 Named Prediction 
 Examples of Tutor Responses 
 Entity Accuracy 

 1 
 esaC 
 Good job working through this and trying 
 True Effort 
 some different approaches. 
 Accurate 
 Good job working through this and trying 
 Pred Effort 
 some different approaches. 
 2 
 esaC 
 Try your best to focus on the next step, 
 True Outcome 
 you re already doing great so far. 
 Inaccurate 
 Try your best to focus on the next step, 
 Pred None 
 you re already doing great so far. 
 3 
 esaC 
 You did it, you did well, you got the Outcome 
 True right answer and you stuck with it, I m 
 proud of what you have done. Good job. Effort Partially 
 You did it, you did well, you got the Outcome Accurate 
 Pred right answer and you stuck with it, I m 
 proud of what you have done. Good job. Effort 
 4 
 esaC 
 I am glad you asked for help today. We 
 True None 
 can do this homework together. 
 Accurate 
 I am glad you asked for help today. We 
 Pred None 
 can do this homework together. 
 Through evaluating and analyzing the results of NER, we noted that there is
 a need for a more nuanced measure that can acknowledge: partial overlap (e.g.,
 Case 3); and true negative prediction results (e.g., Case 4). In Table 3, Case 3,
 the model s prediction exhibits a degree of accuracy (i.e., Good job tagged as
 Outcome, you stuck with it tagged as Effort) but lacks complete correctness
 (i.e., I m proud of what you have done mislabeled as Effort). Nevertheless, the
 former accurate labeling of NEs can still be used for guiding tutors in providing
 effective praise. Thus, the prediction for Case 3 is deemed partially accurate.
 Future research endeavors should focus on developing a measure to calculate
 partial accuracy, such as computing the intersection over union of the number
 of tokens in the predicted text and the desired text. Additionally, the NER
 model could also make true negative predictions where the tutor response did
 not contain any praise entities and was identified as having none of NEs (i.e.,
 Case 4 in Table 3). As discussed in Section 3.3, there lacked accurate predictions
 on the O tag when calculating the classification performance score. However, it is
 also important to identify the tutor s responses that only contain the O tag (i.e.,
 none of the NEs) since it could indicate that the tutors might not understand

 

 

 

 Automatic Explanatory Feedback to Human Tutors 9 

 how to deliver correct praise. In Table 3, the tutor response in Case 4 did not
 contain any praise entities and this response was not related to any type of praise.
 The NER model could successfully identify that the response did not contain
 any type of praise. Based on the model prediction, feedback can be generated to
 guide tutors on providing praise that corresponds with the Effort and Outcome
 named entities 
 5 Discussion and Conclusion 

 
 The construction of automatic short answer grading with the capability of providing explanatory feedback is a longstanding task towards delivering timely,
 specific, and personalized feedback to learners. This study employed large language models to facilitate the provision of corrective and explanatory feedback
 to tutors, with the main findings summarized in two folds: (1) Large language
 models (e.g., BERT) have the potential to identify the effort-based praise, which
 can be used to provide corrective feedback to novice tutors on the appropriate use of effort-based praise to students. (2) Large language models-facilitated
 named entity recognition (NER) can highlight the key terms associated with
 praise types from tutors responses. The highlighted terms can then be integrated into template-based feedback, which can provide real-time explanatory
 feedback to tutors to enhance tutor learning. 
 5.1 Implications 
 Incorporation of a binary classifier can provide automatic corrective
 feedback. The developed classifier can be used to determine the correctness
 of novice tutors in providing different types of praise. The predicted classifier
 results can be further integrated into the provision of corrective feedback, which
 is essential in the learning process since corrective feedback can assist the feedback recipients in identifying errors and enhancing understanding [2]. Through
 the integration of the classifier within the system, we aim to provide automatic
 corrective feedback to tutors in dispensing various forms of praise.
 Providing automatic templated feedback enhances tutor learning. To
 better facilitate the provision of corrective feedback, this study further investigated the potential of NER in identifying the words within the tutors responses
 that correspond to the correct types of praise (i.e., Effort and Outcome). The
 words identified as correct praise in the tutors responses can be integrated into
 a system of providing explanatory feedback. Fig. 1, within the Section of Introduction, illustrates an example of providing a tutor templated explanatory
 feedback using an integrated NER interface. Referencing the interface, when a
 tutor composes praise that includes effort- and/or outcome-based praise, the system will label the Effort and/or Outcome NEs and further provide explanatory
 feedback to the tutor. As informed by the suggestions of effective feedback [2],
 incorporating explanations into feedback can help the tutor better understand
 the lesson objectives and content. To this end, we believe that integrating the
 NER model into our system could support the tutor s learning process.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 10 Lin et al. 

 5.2 Limitations and Future Work 

 Managing low confidence prediction using the feedback interface. The
 confidence level of the model s predictions is a critical aspect to consider in
 real-world applications. The model confidence level could affect people s belief
 in the model s accuracy [18]. Thus, when the model presents low confidence
 in predicting an instance, it poses a challenge. In such situations, it would be
 beneficial to design the feedback interface that presents the uncertainties to the
 learner. For example, when a model s confidence level on a prediction is below a
 certain threshold, our template-based feedback could provide hedged responses,
 such as Saying you are committed might be an example of praising effort. Do
 you want to explain your reasoning? . This approach not only helps uphold the
 credibility of the system but also invites learners to engage critically with the
 predictions. Future work entails providing hedged feedback responses offering
 learners the opportunity to explain their reasoning, along with other strategies
 for effectively managing low confidence predictions in the feedback interface.
 Enhancing the evaluation metrics for NER. As indicated by Case 3 and
 Case 4 in Table 3, respectively, the mode s prediction may demonstrate partial
 correctness, for incidences where the predicted text only partially matches the
 desired text or, true negative predictions, where the tutor s response is accurately
 predicted to contain no praise entities. We argue that both partial correctness
 and the true negative predictions are useful in providing explanatory feedback
 and thus, both types of predictions should be credited. However, the traditional
 NER measure (F1 score) might not fully account for partial correctness and true
 negative predictions. Therefore, future work should explore the development of
 measures, such as the degree of dissimilarity between sets via calculation of intersection over union [11] to account for these cases, thereby leading to a more
 comprehensive evaluation of the model s performance. 
 Improving NER performance through data augmentation. By examining the model of NER for identifying the praise entity from the lesson of Give
 effective praise, we found that our annotated NEs might not be sufficient to
 train the model, which is under a low-resource data scenario [16]. To address
 this issue, we aim to collect more real-world data and explore widely-used data
 augmentation approaches (e.g., oversampling and synonyms replacement) [5] and
 ChatGPT-generated training instances [20] to improve NER model performance.
 Robust models for enhancing the performance of NER. An alternative
 solution to low-resource dataset is to employ robust machine learning models. As
 indicated in the statistic of our dataset (Table 1), more than 70% of annotations
 were annotated as the O tag, which was highly imbalanced. To achieve satisfactory performance under the low-resource and imbalance settings, [16] proposed
 to use AUC Maximization approaches for the NER task in the biomedical field,
 which effectively overcome challenges among low-resources and imbalanced class
 distribution. Thus, we aim to further examine the efficacy of AUC Maximization
 approaches on recognizing the praise entities. 
 Generalizability across tutor lessons. Our ultimate goal is to provide automatic feedback to all novice tutors who participate in our training sessions and

 

 

 

 

 

 Automatic Explanatory Feedback to Human Tutors 11 

 assist them to understand the effective ways to teach students. Thus, a qualified
 tutor should be able to comprehend all the training lessons. Though our study
 examined the potentials of labeling tutor responses and providing explanatory
 feedback for Giving Effective Praise lessons, it is necessary to investigate our
 proposed methods in other lessons such as Responding to Student s Errors and
 Learning What Students Know discussed in previous work [21]. 
 6 Acknowledgments. 

 This work is supported with funding from the Richard King Mellon Foundation
 (Grant #10851) and the Heinz Endowments (E6291). Any opinions, findings,
 and conclusions expressed in this material are those of the authors. We would
 like to thank Dr. Ralph Abboud for his guidance and recommendations regarding
 the use of large language models and the application of named entity recognition.

 Bibliography 

 [1] Aleven, V., Popescu, O., Koedinger, K.R.: Towards tutorial dialog to support self-explanation: Adding natural language understanding to a cognitive
 tutor. In: Proceedings of Artificial Intelligence in Education. pp. 246 255
 (2001) 
 [2] Butler, A.C., Godbole, N., Marsh, E.J.: Explanation feedback is better than
 correct answer feedback for promoting transfer of learning. Journal of Educational Psychology 105(2), 290 (2013) 
 [3] Chine, D.R., Chhabra, P., Adeniran, A., Gupta, S., Koedinger, K.R.: Development of scenario-based mentor lessons: an iterative design process for
 training at scale. In: Proceedings of the Ninth ACM Conference on Learning@ Scale. pp. 469 471 (2022) 
 [4] Devlin, J., Chang, M.W., Lee, K., Toutanova, K.: Bert: Pre-training of deep
 bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In: Proceedings of
 the 2019 Conference of the NAACL-HLT, Volume 1. pp. 4171 4186 (2019)
 [5] Feng, S.Y., Gangal, V., Wei, J., Chandar, S., Vosoughi, S., Mitamura, T.,
 Hovy, E.: A survey of data augmentation approaches for nlp. In: Findings
 of the ACL: ACL-IJCNLP 2021. pp. 968 988 (2021) 
 [6] Gholamy, A., Kreinovich, V., Kosheleva, O.: Why 70/30 or 80/20 relation
 between training and testing sets: A pedagogical explanation. International
 Journal of Intelligent Technologies & Applied Statistics 11(2) (2018)
 [7] Hattie, J., Timperley, H.: The power of feedback. Review of Educational
 Research (2007) 
 [8] Kamins, M.L., Dweck, C.S.: Person versus process praise and criticism: implications for contingent self-worth and coping. Developmental psychology
 35(3), 835 (1999) 
 [9] Koedinger, K.R., Carvalho, P.F., Liu, R., McLaughlin, E.A.: An astonishing
 regularity in student learning rate. Proceedings of the National Academy
 of Sciences 120(13), e2221311120 (2023) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 12 Lin et al. 

 [10] Kraft, M.A., Falken, G.T.: A blueprint for scaling tutoring and mentoring
 across public schools. AERA Open 7, 23328584211042858 (2021) 
 [11] Levandowsky, M., Winter, D.: Distance between sets. Nature 234(5323),
 34 35 (1971) 
 [12] Li, J., Sun, A., Han, J., Li, C.: A survey on deep learning for named entity
 recognition. IEEE TKDE 34(1), 50 70 (2020) 
 [13] Lin, J., Dai, W., Lim, L.A., Tsai, Y.S., Mello, R.F., Khosravi, H., Ga sevi c,
 D., Chen, G.: Learner-centred analytics of feedback content in higher education. In: LAK23. pp. 100 110 (2023) 
 [14] Lin, J., Singh, S., Sha, L., Tan, W., Lang, D., Ga sevi c, D., Chen, G.: Is it a
 good move? mining effective tutoring strategies from human human tutorial
 dialogues. Future Generation Computer Systems 127, 194 207 (2022)
 [15] Lin, J., Tan, W., Nguyen, N.D., Lang, D., Du, L., Buntine, W., Beare, R.,
 Chen, G., Ga sevi c, D.: Robust educational dialogue act classifiers with lowresource and imbalanced datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.07499 (2023)
 [16] Nguyen, N.D., Tan, W., Buntine, W., Beare, R., Chen, C., Du, L.: Auc
 maximization for low-resource named entity recognition. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2212.04800 (2023) 
 [17] Nickow, A., Oreopoulos, P., Quan, V.: The impressive effects of tutoring on
 prek-12 learning: A systematic review and meta-analysis of the experimental evidence. working paper 27476. National Bureau of Economic Research
 (2020) 
 [18] Rechkemmer, A., Yin, M.: When confidence meets accuracy: Exploring the
 effects of multiple performance indicators on trust in machine learning models. In: Proceedings of the 2022 CHI conference. pp. 1 14 (2022)
 [19] Ryan, T., Henderson, M., Ryan, K., Kennedy, G.: Designing learner-centred
 text-based feedback: a rapid review and qualitative synthesis. Assessment
 & Evaluation in Higher Education 46(6), 894 912 (2021) 
 [20] Thomas, D., Gupta, S., Koedinger, K.: Comparative analysis of learnersourced human-graded and ai-generated responses for autograding online
 tutor lessons. In: Artificial Intelligence in Education. 24th International
 Conference, AIED 2023, Tokyo, Japan July 3 7, 2023. Springer (2023)
 [21] Thomas, D., Yang, X., Gupta, S., Adeniran, A., Mclaughlin, E., Koedinger,
 K.: When the tutor becomes the student: Design and evaluation of efficient
 scenario-based lessons for tutors. In: LAK23: 13th International Learning
 Analytics and Knowledge Conference. pp. 250 261 (2023) 
 [22] Thompson, M., Owho-Ovuakporie, K., Robinson, K., Kim, Y.J., Slama, R.,
 Reich, J.: Teacher moments: A digital simulation for preservice teachers to
 approximate parent teacher conversations. Journal of Digital Learning in
 Teacher Education 35(3), 144 164 (2019) 
 [23] Walter, C.: Increasing teachers trust in automatic text assessment through
 named-entity recognition. In: AIED22. Posters and Late Breaking Results,
 Workshops and Tutorials, Industry and Innovation Tracks, Practitioners 
 and Doctoral Consortium. pp. 191 194. Springer (2022) 
 [24] Zhang, M., Baral, S., Heffernan, N., Lan, A.: Automatic short math answer
 grading via in-context meta-learning. In: Proceedings of the International
 Conference on Educational Data Mining (2022)