(cid:12) 
 Reinforcement Learning Journal 2025 (cid:12) Cover Page 

 Value Bonuses using Ensemble Errors 

 for Exploration in Reinforcement Learning 

 Abdul Wahab, Raksha Kumaraswamy, Martha White 

 Keywords: Reinforcement Learning, Exploration, Value bonuses, Ensembles, Uncertainty
 estimates 

 
 Summary 

 Optimistic value estimation can be useful to direct exploration and improve sample efficiency in Reinforcement Learning. Despite many such methods in literature, simpler, undirected approaches like -greedy still continue to be widely used. One potential reason for
 this is that many existing methods can be onerous to use as they may not be compatible
 with the base learning algorithm, or can be hard-to-use as many design choices need to be
 made to make them effective in practice. This paper proposes a simple approach to address
 these limitations. Building on ideas that utilize an ensemble for optimistic value estimation, this work proposes an algorithm called Value Bonuses using Ensemble Errors (VBE)
 that is easy to use and compatible with any base Reinforcement Learning algorithm, with
 a small additional computational foot-print. VBE s similarity and difference to existing approaches is discussed, and the algorithm is evaluated extensively. Our code is available at:
 https://github.com/mirzaabdulwahab1612/VBE 

 
 Contribution(s) 
 1. Proposes a new approach for estimating Value Bonuses using Ensemble Errors that allows
 for first-visit optimism and deep exploration. 
 Context: Many prior works utilize the idea of value bonuses to estimate optimistic values for exploration (Osband et al., 2019). Typically, many estimate an additional value
 function that propagates reward bonuses in order to estimate the value bonus (Burda et al.,
 2019). This work proposes a variant of value bonuses that does not rely on propagating additional reward bonuses; this allows for desirable features like first-visit optimism. We show
 our framework allows for Optimistic Initial Values with high probability. Additionally, the
 value bonuses have a similar timescale of learning as the main value function, therefore,
 potentially allowing for deep exploration. 
 2. Provides insight into how our proposed value bonuses are similar to and different from some
 relevant widely-used approaches. 
 Context: In specific, we contrast how the proposed bonuses capture MDP-specific properties like transition dynamics, unlike those of RND (Burda et al., 2019). Additionally, we
 highlight the similarity between quantities estimated by the proposed algorithm and BDQN
 (Osband et al., 2019), despite the difference that BDQN utilizes a Thompson sampling approach to induce optimism. 
 3. Empirically evaluate the utility of the proposed value bonuses for inducing exploration in
 classic-control problems, and demonstrate scalability through Atari.
 Context: We demonstrate how existing methods lack first-visit optimism in a controlled
 setting designed to test state coverage. We show that the proposed algorithm can extend
 to more complex environments like Atari without design choices that alter the underlying
 algorithm. 
 6202 
 beF 
 21 
 ]GL.sc[ 
 1v57321.2062:viXra 

 

 Value Bonuses using Ensemble Errors for Exploration in Reinforcement Learning

 

 Value Bonuses using Ensemble Errors 
 for Exploration in Reinforcement Learning 

 
 Abdul Wahab1, Raksha Kumaraswamy2, Martha White1,3 

 {wahab1, whitem}@ualberta.ca, raksha.kumaraswamy@sony.com 
 1Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta, Canada 
 2Sony AI 
 3Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute (Amii) 

 

 Abstract 
 Optimisticvalueestimatesprovideonemechanismfordirectedexplorationinreinforcement learning (RL). The agent acts greedily with respect to an estimate of the value plus
 whatcan be seen as avalue bonus. The valuebonus canbe learnedby estimatinga value
 function on reward bonuses, propagating local uncertainties around rewards. However,
 this approach only increases the value bonus for an action retroactively, after seeing a
 higher reward bonus from that state and action. Such an approach does not encourage
 the agent to visit a state and action for the first time. In this work, we introduce an algorithm for exploration called Value Bonuses with Ensemble errors (VBE), that maintains
 an ensemble of random action-value functions (RQFs). VBE uses the errors in the estimation of these RQFs to design value bonuses that provide first-visit optimism and deep
 exploration. The key idea is to design the rewards for these RQFs in such a way that the
 value bonus can decrease to zero. We show that VBE outperforms Bootstrap DQN and
 two reward bonus approaches (RND and ACB) on several classic environments used to
 test exploration and provide demonstrative experiments that it can scale easily to more
 complex environments like Atari. We provide code for VBE here. 

 1 Introduction 

 A typical approach to incorporate exploration into a value-based reinforcement learning (RL) agent
 is to obtain optimistic value estimates. The agent takes greedy actions according to this optimistic
 value estimate, leading it to take actions that look good either because they have high uncertainty or
 because the action is actually high value. This approach has been well-developed for the contextual
 bandit setting, with a variety of algorithms and theoretical results on optimality (Li et al., 2010;
 Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011). Understanding is growing about how to soundly extend these ideas
 to reinforcement learning, though the theoretical results on estimating and using optimistic values
 are limited to the linear function approximation setting (Grande et al., 2014; Osband et al., 2016a;
 Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2019). 
 Though the theory is difficult to extend, there has been a concerted effort to develop and empirically evaluate such optimistic value estimation approaches for the deep RL setting. Bootstrap DQN
 with priors, for example, maintains an ensemble of action-values, which reflect uncertainty in the
 value estimates (Osband et al., 2018; 2019). It takes a Thompson sampling approach which can
 be seen as optimistic by sampling one action-value in the ensemble and following it for an entire
 episode. Another common approach to obtain optimistic value estimates employs the usage of reward bonuses (Bellemare et al., 2016; Ostrovski et al., 2017; Burda et al., 2019; Ash et al., 2022). A
 reward bonus, reflecting uncertainty with respect to the transition, is added to the reward, increasing
 the estimated value proportionally for the corresponding states and action.

 

 

 Reinforcement Learning Journal 2025 

 
 Most works, however, eschew these directed exploration approaches in favor of simpler, undirected
 exploration approaches like -greedy. One potential reason for this is that reward bonus approaches
 do not encourage first-visit optimism. They encourage revisiting a state, if the reward bonus was high
 in that state; namely, they retroactively reason about uncertainty of states they have seen. The reward
 bonus cannot encourage visiting a state for the first time. Bootstrap DQN with priors (BDQN), on
 the other hand, does not have this issue, using fixed additive priors to provide first-visit optimism.
 Unlike reward bonuses, though, BDQN is more onerous to use. It requires completely changing the
 algorithm to one that maintains and updates an ensemble, and making key choices like how often to
 follow one of the value functions in the ensemble before switching. Recent work suggests it is key
 to have a large ensemble for BDQN (Janz et al., 2019; Osband et al., 2023). Epinets (Osband et al.,
 2023) can match the performance of BDQN with much less compute, but are arguably even more
 onerous to implement than BDQN. Our goal is to develop an easy-to-use exploration approach for
 deep RL, that can easily be added to an existing algorithm, making it less onerous to displace the
 default -greedy approach. 
 To do so, we explore how to directly estimate a value bonus. The agent acts greedily according to
 the value estimate plus this separate value bonus b, namely argmax q(s,a) + b(s,a). The value
 a 
 bonus should ideally represent the uncertainty for that state and action. Though this may be the first
 time this term is used,1 there are some works that estimate value bonuses. One simple approach is
 to separate out the reward bonuses and learn them with a second value function, as was proposed for
 RND (Burda et al., 2019) and later adopted by ACB (Ash et al., 2022). This approach, however, still
 suffers from the fact that reward bonuses are only retroactive, and the resulting b is unlikely to be
 high for unvisited states and actions. For the contextual bandit setting, the ACB algorithm actually
 directly estimates the value bonus using the maximum over an ensemble of functions, which is high
 for unvisited states and actions; but the extension to deep RL with reward bonuses loses this firstvisit optimism. UCLS (Kumaraswamy et al., 2018) and UBE (O Donoghue et al., 2018; Janz et al.,
 2019) both directly estimate value bonuses, but are limited to linear function approximation. Dora
 (Choshen et al., 2018) uses value bonuses that are inversely proportional to visitation counts, which
 is again difficult to extend to the general function approximation setting.
 In this work, we introduce a new approach to obtain value bonuses for reinforcement learning, with
 an algorithm we call Value Bonuses with Ensemble errors (VBE). Similarly to ACB, we use a maximum over an ensemble, but directly use that maximum as the value bonus, rather than indirectly
 through reward bonuses. The idea is to sample a random action-value function (RQF) such as
 a random neural network and extract the implicit random reward function underlying this RQF
 target. The RQF predictor in the ensemble is updated using temporal difference learning on this
 random reward. Because the RQF target is sampled from the same function class as the RQF predictor, the error can eventually reduce to zero, allowing the value bonus to shrink to zero. These
 value bonuses are learned separately from the main action-values, and so can be layered on top of
 many algorithms. In our experiments, for example, we simply use Double DQN (Van Hasselt et al.,
 2016), and modify the step where the agent selects an action from -greedy to instead taking the
 greedy action in the value estimate plus the value bonus. We show that this simple approach is an
 effective, and scalable method for exploration that improves sample efficiency of learning in a range
 of domains: from hard exploration gridworlds, to image-based Atari domains.
 2 Background 
 We focus on the problem of an agent learning optimal behaviour in an environment, whose interaction process is modelled as a Markov Decision Process (MDP). A MDP consists of (S,A,P,r, )
 where S is the set of states; A is the set of actions; P : S A S [0, ) provides the transition probabilities; r : S A S R is the reward function; and : S A S [0,1] is
 the transition-based discount function which enables either continuing or episodic problems to be
 1Usually, b would be called a confidence interval, with q(s,a) + b(s,a) an upper confidence bound. However, we do
 notusethattermhere,becausefortheheuristicsweuse,itisnotclearwegetavalidupperconfidencebound. Instead,itisa
 bonusaddedtothevaluewhendecidingwhichactionlookspromising. 

 

 

 Value Bonuses using Ensemble Errors for Exploration in Reinforcement Learning

 
 specified (White, 2017). At each step, the agent selects action A in state S , and transitions to S ,
 t t t+1 
 according to P, receiving reward R =def r(S ,A ,S ) and discount =def (S ,A ,S ).
 t+1 t t t+1 t+1 t t t+1 
 For a policy : S A [0, ], the value for taking action a in state s is the expected discounted
 sum of future rewards, with actions selected according to in the future,
 (cid:104) (cid:12) (cid:105) 
 q (s,a) = E R + q (S ,A )(cid:12)S = s,A = a 
 t+1 t+1 t+1 t+1 (cid:12) t t 
 where E means that actions are selected according to in the expectation. The policy can be

 progressively improved by making it greedy in q (s,a), then updating the action-values for the new
 policy, then repeating until convergence. 
 In practice, these steps are approximated. The action-values q are approximated using q paramw 
 eterized by w W Rd. One algorithm to estimate q is Double DQN (DDQN). DDQN is an
 w 
 off-policy algorithm, meaning that it uses a different behavior policy to select actions from the
 b 
 policy it evaluates, which is greedy in q . This algorithm uses a target network q for bootstrapping,
 w w 
 giving the following update for one transition (s,a,r,s , ): 
 w w + q (s,a) for =def r + q (s ,argmaxq (s ,a )) q (s,a) (1)
 w w w w 
 a 
 The behavior policy is typically defined to be -greedy in q , but can be any policy that promotes
 w 
 exploration. In this work, we consider an alternative choice for the behavior policy: one that uses
 a value bonus b, (s) = argmax q (s,a) + b(s,a). The value bonus should reflect uncertainty
 b a w 
 in the action-value estimate, encouraging the behavior policy to take an action in a state if it has
 high uncertainty. It might have high uncertainty if (s,a) is quite different from what it has seen
 before meaning it has never been visited or because the agent has not yet visited it sufficiently
 often to be certain about its value. The focus of this work is a new approach for obtaining b for the
 deep RL setting. 
 3 Value Bonuses with Ensemble Errors 
 Inthissection, wefirstmotivatewhyweuseanensembleofvaluefunctions, ratherthansimplyusing
 supervised learning for the ensemble. We then discuss how to appropriately define the rewards for
 the ensemble value functions, and contrast the unique property of the bonuses produced by these
 ensemble of value functions. 
 The most straightforward approach to get an error from an ensemble is to use a random target, as
 is done in RND. For an ensemble of size k, we can generate random neural networks f ,...,f
 1 k 
 and update the learned functions f ,...,f in the ensemble using a squared error: for each (s,a),
 1 k 
 update each f using loss (f (s,a) f (s,a))2. The value bonus for any (s,a) can be set to
 i i i 
 . 
 b(s,a) = max|f (s,a) f (s,a)| (2) 
 i i 
 i [k] 
 Ciosek et al. (2020) show that fitting random prior functions serve as a computationally tractable
 approach towards estimating uncertainty in the supervised learning setting. Unfortunately, in the
 reinforcement learning setting, this is likely to concentrate too quickly, and will not do what has
 been called deep exploration (Osband et al., 2019). We want the agent to reason not just about
 uncertainty for this state and action, but also about the uncertainty of the state that it leads into.2
 Instead, we want an ensemble of value functions that are more likely to promote deep exploration.
 More specifically, we want to generate random rewards r for each f , where the f are updated
 i wi wi 
 usingstandardtemporaldifferencelearningbootstrappingapproaches. Wewantthelearningdynamics for these value functions to resemble the primary value function, so that they learn at a similar
 timescale and are more likely converge to zero once the primary value function has also converged.
 2Note that RND do not use these errors directly for exploration. Instead, they used them as reward bonuses, which can
 retroactivelypromotedeepexploration,withtheissuethattheydonotpromotefirst-visitoptimism.

 

 Reinforcement Learning Journal 2025 

 
 We need to define rewards and target functions that are consistent with each other and that allow
 us to easily measure the errors. Consider if we again do the simplest thing: generate a random
 neural network r for each f . Let us assume for now that we have a fixed policy, . First, it is
 i wi 
 not clear how we would actually measure the error since we do not know the true value function
 f , namely the expected return using r under policy . Further, this true value function may not be
 i i 
 representable by f . 
 wi 
 Instead, our proposed approach is to generate a random action-value function (RQF) f , and then
 i 
 define rewards consistent with that f . Define the stochastic ensemble reward from (S ,A ) to be
 i t t 
 R =def f (S ,A ) f (S ,A ), (3) 
 i,t+1 i t t t+1 i t+1 t+1 
 where A ( |S ) and =def (S ,A ,S ) is defined by the environment. Further, by
 t+1 t+1 t+1 t t t+1 
 definition, the action-values of the random prediction function is: 
 q 
 i 
 (s,a) =def E 

 (cid:2) R 
 i,t+1 
 + 
 t+1 
 q 
 i 
 (S 
 t+1 
 ,A 
 t+1 
 ) (cid:12) (cid:12)S 
 t 
 = s,A 
 t 
 = a (cid:3) . (4) 
 We show in the following proposition that q = f . 
 i i 
 Proposition 1 For all i [k], we have q = f . 
 i i 
 Proof: 
 q 
 i 
 (s,a) = E 

 (cid:2) R 
 i,t+1 
 + 
 t+1 
 q 
 i 
 (S 
 t+1 
 ,A 
 t+1 
 ) (cid:12) (cid:12)S 
 t 
 = s,A 
 t 
 = a (cid:3) 
 = E 

 (cid:2) R 
 i,t+1 
 + 
 t+1 
 R 
 i,t+2 
 + 
 t+1 

 t+2 
 q 
 i 
 (S 
 t+2 
 ,A 
 t+2 
 ) (cid:12) (cid:12)S 
 t 
 = s,A 
 t 
 = a (cid:3) 
 (cid:104) 
 = E [f (s,a) f (S ,A )] + [f (S ,A ) f (S ,A )] 
 i t+1 i t+1 t+1 t+1 i t+1 t+1 t+2 i t+2 t+2 
 + 
 t+1 

 t+2 
 q 
 i 
 (S 
 t+2 
 ,A 
 t+2 
 ) (cid:12) (cid:12)S 
 t 
 = s,A 
 t 
 = a (cid:105) 
 (cid:104) 
 = E [f (s,a) f (S ,A )]+ f (S ,A ) 
 i t+1 i t+1 t+1 t+1 i t+1 t+1 
 (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125)(cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125)
 cancels cancels 

 t+1 

 t+2 
 f 
 i 
 (S 
 t+2 
 ,A 
 t+2 
 )] + 
 t+1 

 t+2 
 q 
 i 
 (S 
 t+2 
 ,A 
 t+2 
 ) (cid:12) (cid:12)S 
 t 
 = s,A 
 t 
 = a (cid:105) . 
 We can keep unrolling this, and these terms will continue to telescope, leaving only the first term
 f (s,a), completing the proof. 
 i 
 Therefore, updating f with rewards r should converge to q and so to f because f is in the
 wi i i i i 
 function class of f . This convergence ensures the value bonuses go to zero, which is desired if
 wi 
 we want the agent to stop exploring and converge to the greedy policy. Even with a fixed policy,
 however, this convergence will only occur under certain conditions. Primarily, the failure would
 be that f gets stuck in a local minima or even that it diverges, due to know issues with temporal
 wi 
 difference (TD) learning algorithms combined with neural networks and with off-policy update.
 There is fortunately a large (and growing) literature understanding the convergence behavior of TD
 algorithms. Under linear function approximation, we know least-squares TD converges at a rate of

 1/ T to the global solution, even under off-policy sampling (Tagorti & Scherrer, 2015). With the
 advent of theory for overparameterized networks, TD with a particular neural network function class
 has been shown to converge to the global solution, under on-policy sampling (Cai et al., 2019). In
 general, we know that a class of modified TD algorithms, called gradient TD methods, converge
 even under off-policy sampling and nonlinear function approximation (Dai et al., 2017; Patterson
 et al., 2022). Convergence under off-policy sampling is key in our setting, because the behavior
 policy is optimistic but the target policy may be greedy. We expect that under certain conditions on
 the neural network it might be possible to say that these gradient TD methods converge to global
 solutions, though to the best of our knowledge, no such work yet exists. We provide a more complete
 discussion in Appendix of how this existing theory on convergence of TD applies to our setting.

 

 Value Bonuses using Ensemble Errors for Exploration in Reinforcement Learning

 
 3.1 Bonuses that reflect MDP-specific properties 
 While the form of the bonus proposed above in Equation 2 looks similar in principle to RND, the
 main difference as mentioned previously is that we consider the ensemble to be composed of random
 value functions, in contrast to methods like RND which consider the ensemble to be composed of
 random functions. This simple change provides an interesting property to the bonuses derived from
 this ensemble: they can reflect the stochasticity in the transition dynamics of the MDP.

 Proposition 2 Let f (s,a) =def E[R + f (S ,A )|S = s,A = a] + (s,a), where
 i i,t+1 t+1 i t+1 t+1 t t i 
 (s,a) denotes the Bellman error for (s,a) in f . Then 
 i i 
 b(s,a) = max (cid:12) (cid:12) E[ t+1 (f i (S t+1 ,A t+1 ) f i (S t+1 ,A t+1 ))|S t = s,A t = a] + i (s,a) (cid:12) (cid:12).
 i [k] 
 Proof: By the assumption that f is a value-function, we know that 
 i 
 f (s,a) =def E[R + f (S ,A )|S = s,A = a]. 
 i i,t+1 t+1 i t+1 t+1 t t 
 Plugging the definitions into Equation 2, we get 
 b(s,a) = max|f (s,a) f (s,a)| 
 i i 
 i [k] 
 = max (cid:12) (cid:12) E[R i,t+1 + t+1 f i (S t+1 ,A t+1 )|S t = s,A t = a] + i (s,a)
 i [k] 
 E[R i,t+1 + t+1 f i (S t+1 ,A t+1 )|S t = s,A t = a] (cid:12) (cid:12)
 = max (cid:12) (cid:12) E[ t+1 (f i (S t+1 ,A t+1 ) f i (S t+1 ,A t+1 ))|S t = s,A t = a] + i (s,a) (cid:12) (cid:12).
 i [k] 

 4 Using the Ensemble of Value Functions 
 We provide pseudocode in Algorithm 1, for the case where the base algorithm is Double DQN, but
 it is possible to swap in many different off-policy value-based algorithms. Even actor-critic, which
 explicitly maintains a critic q , could easily incorporate the value bonuses by using an optimistic
 w 
 critic. For the purposes of this paper, however, we restrict our focus to Double DQN.
 The ensemble value functions are updated on the same target policy as Double DQN, namely the
 greedy policy in q . This choice comes from the fact that we want to understand uncertainty in the
 w 
 values for the target policy. We further investigate the impact of this choice in Appendix F. The
 update is similar to Double DQN, except the actions are sampled according to q rather than f ,
 w wi 
 and we use the ensemble reward r defined above in Equation (3): 
 i 
 w w + f (s,a) for =def r + f (s ,argmaxq (s ,a )) f (s,a) (5)
 i i i wi i w i w wi 
 a 
 On each step, we only update one RQF predictor. Updating the entire ensemble is expensive, and
 arguably unnecessary. There are multiple ways to control the magnitude of the value bonus, and
 how quickly it decays. One way is the size of the ensemble, where the larger the ensemble, the more
 slowly this bonus should decay. Updating each RQF predictor less frequently, however, will also
 cause the bonus to decay more slowly. It both allows us to make the ensemble smaller, and ensure
 that regardless of the ensemble size, the computation per-step is simply double that of Double DQN:
 one update to the main value function and one update to an RQF predictor.
 4.1 Guaranteeing Optimistic Initial Values 
 In this section we show the ensemble size and bonus scale c can be set to obtain optimistic initial
 values with high probability. The result motivates that value bonuses with ensemble errors provide
 sufficient first-visit optimism. 

 

 Reinforcement Learning Journal 2025 

 
 Algorithm 1 Value Bonuses with Ensemble Errors (VBE) 
 1: Parameters: ensemble size k, bonus scale c, target net update frequency , batch size m
 2: Initialize empty buffer: B , action-value function: q w , target RQFs: f i ,...f k , predictor
 RQFs: f ,...,f , and target networks: q , f ,...,f 
 w1 wk w w 1 w k 
 3: Optimistic behavior policy: 
 (s) argmax q (s,a) + c b(s,a) 
 b a A w 
 where b(s,a) max |f (s,a) f (s,a)| 
 i [k] wi i 
 4: Get the initial state s 0 
 5: for environment interactions t = 0,1,... do 
 6: Take action a (s t ) and observe r t+1 ,s t+1 , t+1 
 7: Add (s t ,a t ,r t+1 ,s t+1 , t+1 ) to the buffer B 
 8: // Update action-values using DDQN update 
 9: Sample mini-batch from B, update q w using Eq. (1) 
 10: // Update one randomly selected RQF 
 11: Sample i from [k] uniform randomly 
 12: Sample mini-batch from B, update f wi using Eq. (5) where 
 for each (s,a,r,s , ) replace r with 
 r =def f (s,a) f (s ,argmax q (s ,a )) 
 i i i a A w 
 13: if t + 1 mod == 0 then 
 14: q w q w and for all i, f w i f wi 
 15: end if 
 16: end for 
 We assume that we initialize our action-values q and target and predictor RQFs with a standard
 random neural network initialization. Given a fixed initialization, we can jointly reason about the
 deep setting and the linear setting. In the linear setting, for a given state, we have n-dimensional
 features (s), ,..., (s) Rn for the q and RQFs respectively. In the deep setting, the last layer
 1 k 
 of the fixed neural network specifies the features. We additionally assume that the features from this
 last layer are all normalized, (s) = 1 for all s, to simplify the proof; but this is not strictly
 i 2 
 necessary and a similar result can be obtained without normalization.
 Assumption 1 The feature functions (s), ,..., (s) Rn are all unit length have an 
 1 k 2 
 norm of 1 for every state. All weights are iid sampled from N(0,1/n), to get initializations q(s,a) =
 (s) w , f (s,a) = (s) w and f (s,a) = (s) w 
 a i i a,i wi i a,i 
 Proposition 3 Let z( ) be the z-value for a Gaussian X N(0,1) where Pr(X > z( )) = 1 
 for (0,1). Take any q R and any (0,1). Then for any s,a, if
 max 
 (cid:113) 
 c n (cid:0) q z( /2)/ n (cid:1) /(log(k/2) loglog(2/ ))
 max 
 then 
 q(s,a) + c max |f (s,a) f (s,a)| > q 
 i 1,...,k 
 i wi max 
 with probability 1 . 
 Proof: Pick any s S,a A. Notice that because w N(0,1/n) for all j 
 a,i,j 
 {1,...,n}, that the linear combination of these Gaussians f (s,a) = (s) w is distributed
 i . i a,i 
 as N(0, (s) 2/n) = N(0,1/n) because (s) 2 = 1. Define = f (s,a) f (s,a) =
 i 2 2 i i wi 
 (s) w (s) w , which is the difference of two N(0,1/n) random variables and itself is
 i a,i i a,i 
 (cid:113) 
 again Gaussian with double the variance, N(0, 2). We can rewrite = 2Y where Y N(0,1).
 n i n i i 
 Then we can leverage the result from (Ash et al., 2022, Lemma 1) that gives a lower bound on the

 

 Value Bonuses using Ensemble Errors for Exploration in Reinforcement Learning

 
 maximum of the absolute value of k standard normal Gaussians to get that with probability 1 /2
 (cid:113) 
 max | | = 2 max |Y | 
 i n i 
 i {1,...,k} i {1,...,k} 
 (cid:113) (cid:113) (cid:112) 
 2 log(k/2) loglog(2/ ) 
 n 2 
 (cid:113) (cid:112) 
 = log(k/2) loglog(2/ ) 
 n 
 SimilarlytotheRQFs, becausew N(0,1/n), wealsohavethatq(s,a) = (s) w isGaussian
 a,j a 
 with distribution N(0, (s) 2/n) = N(0,1/n). We can therefore say with probability 1 /2
 2 
 that q(s,a) > z( /2)/ n. Taking the union over these two high probability events, we get that with
 probability 1 , 
 q(s,a) + c max |f (s,a) f (s,a)| > 
 i 1,...,k 
 i wi 
 (cid:113) (cid:112) 
 z( /2)/ n + c log(k/2) loglog(2/ ) 
 n 
 where plugging in the above c makes this second term equal q , giving us the desired result. 
 max 
 We can also ask what happens to the bonuses in VBE after initialization. Ideally, they eventually
 converge to zero, with the action-values converging and the behavior and target policies both converging to a greedy policy. This scenario goes beyond the convergence conditions discussed above
 in Section 3 for fixed policies. In VBE, both our behavior policy and target policy are changing
 with time. Unfortunately, theory around TD does not address this scenario. There are some results
 for a fixed behavior policy for double Q-learning under linear function approximation (Zhao et al.,
 2021), or for a variant of DQN with a fixed dataset (Wang & Ueda, 2022). The issue with a changing
 behavior policy is that it changes the relative importance of states in the objective, and so the best
 value function may change as it changes how it trades off errors across states. In our realizable
 setting, this changing importance may be less important, because our RQF predictor can perfectly
 represent the target. In our own experiments, we found the value bonuses did always converge to
 zero. Nonetheless, we know of no theory that would allow us to guarantee this.
 Connection to BDQN: Though not obvious at first glance, there is a connection between RQFs
 and random prior functions in BDQN. In BDQN, the value function is q = f + cp for a random

 prior function p that is not updated, prior scale c, and a learned function f . Random priors were

 developed for stationary state distributions though then applied to control so let us consider the
 update for a fixed policy . The update uses a ( |s ), giving 
 r c(p(s,a) p(s ,a ))+ f (s ,a ) f (s,a) 

 (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) 
 RQF sreward 
 This is a standard update with reward bonus c(p(s,a) p(s ,a )), and this bonus is a scaled
 negation of our reward in Equation (3). With a fixed policy, we can separate the value function
 learning into q that estimates the values for the rewards and b that estimates the values for the
 reward bonuses. Namely, f consists of q + b . As these functions converge, b (s,a) approaches

 cp(s,a)using the exact same argument to the one inour Proposition 1, justnegating the function p.
 Consequently, f (s,a)+cp(s,a) = q (s,a)+b (s,a)+cp(s,a) = q (s,a)+(b (s,a)+cp(s,a))

 goes to q since b (s,a) + cp(s,a) eventually cancels. 
 This argument is not how randomized priors are presented, but provides another intuitive interpretation. Further, it highlights a key difference between BDQN and VBE: BDQN takes a Thompson
 sampling approach to induce optimism, whereas VBE acts greedily with respect to optimistic value
 estimates. Another key point is that BDQN s prior-based bonus is scaled by the c parameter. The
 prior-based bonus can be seen as adding a fixed noise to the targets in the updates. Scaling the
 bonus term with c would increase the variance in the targets by a factor of c2. This can make the
 optimization problem harder and may cause BDQN to be sensitive towards higher learning rates.
 Unlike BDQN, VBE does not incorporate the c parameter when estimating the RQFs, and only uses
 the bonus scale in the behavior policy. 

 

 Reinforcement Learning Journal 2025 

 
 5 Experiments 

 We evaluate our proposed algorithm on four classic exploration environments and six Atari environments, particularly in comparison to BDQN and the reward bonus approaches ACB and RND. We
 first investigate the algorithms in a pure exploration setting, on Deepsea, where we evaluate state
 coverage. Then we compare performance on the classic environments, and conclude with experiments in Atari, highlighting that VBE scales successfully to this setting. We provide more analysis
 of VBE s sensitivity to its two parameters ensemble size, and bonus scale in Appendix E.
 5.1 Experimental Settings 

 The four classic exploration environments are Sparse Mountain Car, Puddle World, River Swim and
 Deepsea. Full details are in Appendix A, but we list a few key details here. Mountain Car has
 two-dimensional continuous inputs with sparse rewards: the agent only receives a reward of 1 at
 the goal and 0 otherwise. Puddle World also has two-dimensional continuous inputs, noisy actions
 and highly negative rewards in puddles along the way to the goal. River Swim resembles a problem
 where a fish tries to swim upriver, with high reward (+1) upstream which is difficult to reach and,
 a lower but still positive reward (+0.005), which is easily reachable downstream. This environment
 has a single continuous state dimension in [0,1], with stochastic displacement when taking actions
 left or right.3 Deepsea is similar to River Swim, but is a two-dimensional grid world. Reaching
 the high-reward state requires the agent to take the action to go right every time. There is a penalty
 of 0.01 for taking the action right, except in the bottom right corner where there is a reward of 1
 N 
 for taking the action right. A policy that explores uniform randomly has the probability of 2 N of
 reaching the goal state in each episode. 
 We use slightly different evaluation metrics for the various environments. River Swim is continuing,
 so we report accumulated reward over learning. For both Deepsea and Puddle World, we report the
 undiscounted episodic return. For Mountain Car, we report the discounted return, because for every
 successful episode, the undiscounted return is 1 and so not meaningful in this sparse variant. For
 all episodic environments, we report steps on the x-axis and the corresponding episodic return on
 y-axis. All results in the classic environments use 50000 steps and 30 runs, except Deepsea which
 uses 10000 episodes and 5 runs. 
 Across problems we compare VBE with DDQN-based variants of ACB and RND, DQN with additive priors (DQN-P) and BDQN. ACB, RND and VBE only differ in their value bonuses; we use
 the reward bonuses underlying ACB and RND to learn their respective value bonuses. As originally
 proposed, we make the reward-bonus value function non-episodic for ACB and RND. We also compared VBE with the released variants of ACB and RND that use PPO in Appendix B; in general, we
 find this PPO version to be less sample efficient than the DDQN versions. DQN-P simply adds an
 additive prior to DQN, like BDQN; it can be seen as BDQN with one value function in the ensemble.
 We evaluate the algorithms using 1, 2, 8 and 20 value functions in the ensembles and bonus scales
 of 1, 3 and 10. To match their original implementation RND uses two deep neural networks with
 multiple (64) nodes in the final layer as the target and predictor network for the reward bonus. All
 methods use the same neural network architectures, detailed in Appendix A.2.
 We also include VBE-SL, that uses supervised learning instead of a TD update for the RQFs, to
 ablate this component of VBE. We discussed in Section 3 that the errors for VBE-SL likely reduce
 too quickly, resulting in insufficient exploration; we test that hypothesis here. Note that both VBE
 and VBE-SL only update their ensemble, with errors defining their value bonus, whereas ACB and
 RND both have to update their ensembles to get reward bonuses and learn a second value function
 to get the value bonus. 
 3Oneseeminglyinnocuousbutimportantpointtohighlightisthatweflippedtheobservationsuchthatthehighrewardis
 at observation 0 and the lower reward is at observation 1. We did so because the standard random initialization and ReLU
 activation often results in a higher value for a higher input, thus favouring the correct action in the standard variant and
 making algorithms like BDQN look artificially good. Our modified variant removes this inadvertent bias without changing
 theproblemstructureordifficultyinanyway. 

 

 Value Bonuses using Ensemble Errors for Exploration in Reinforcement Learning

 

 1200 

 1000 

 800 

 600 

 400 

 200 

 0 
 30 35 40 45 50 
 Grid size 
 detisiv 
 setats 
 euqinu 
 fo 
 rebmuN 
 Total number of states DQN-P ACB 1275 
 VBE BDQN RND 
 VBE-SL 
 1035 
 930 922 
 884 
 820 811 
 747 
 630 630 615 
 588 
 490 494 
 465 465 
 427 418 
 386 360 337 368 
 313 313 
 209 228 198 242 264 
 161 
 (a) State coverage in Deepsea of different grid sizes 
 1200 
 VBE 
 1000 
 800 
 BDQN RND 
 600 
 DQN-P 
 400 
 ACB 
 100 200 300 400 
 Number of steps (x1000) 
 detisiV 
 setatS 
 euqinU 
 fo 
 rebmuN 
 Figure 1: Contrasting the state coverage abilities
 ofexplorationalgorithmsinDeepSea. In(a)each
 bar corresponds to the total number of unique
 VBE-SL statesvisitedbyanagentaftercompleting10,000
 episodes. The black stars indicate the total number of unique states for each grid size. Notably,
 VBE covers the entire state space, even for the
 larger grid sizes. (b) displays the progression of
 unique states visited by agents over the course
 of learning for Deepsea with grid size 50. The
 200 
 dotted line represents the total number of unique
 states (1275) in this environment. It provides evidence that VBE consistently explores new states
 (b) Progression of unique states visited (grid size 50) 
 at a significantly higher rate. 
 5.2 Pure Exploration 
 We first test how effectively the agents cover the state space in Tabular Deepsea with increasing grid
 sizes. In this setting, the agents observe no reward from the environment; thus, there are no harder
 to reach states, as in the original DeepSea environment. This allows us to evaluate agent s ability
 to do both directed deep exploration and employ first-visit optimism. For this tabular setting, the
 agents are otherwise the same as the other experiments, except the function approximation is linear
 in a one-hot encoding. 
 Figure 1a shows that VBE covers the entire state space for all the grid sizes. BDQN is able to cover
 the state space for a grid size of 30 and 35, but fails on bigger grids. Both ACB and RND fail to cover
 the state space, with ACB covering even less than DQN-P. This outcome is not surprising, given that
 neither approach ensures first-visit optimism. VBE-SL visits more unique states compared to ACB,
 RND and DQN-P. This is because VBE-SL provides first-visit optimism, encouraging the agent to
 take an action in a state if it has not done so before. But, as expected, it does not explore as much as
 VBE, likely as its value bonuses decay too quickly. 
 These suboptimal behaviors are emphasized in Figure 1b for a grid size of 50. All methods initially
 explore at a similar rate, easily reaching around 300 unique states. ACB, RND and DQN-P largely
 stop visiting new states very early in learning, though RND is slowly increasing the number of
 states it visits. BDQN and VBE-SL are similar across in their behavior, with VBE-SL exploring

 

 Reinforcement Learning Journal 2025 

 
 more early, possibly due to better first-visit optimism. Over time, however, BDQN starts to catch up
 and then surpasses VBE-SL. VBE is the only algorithm that maintains a consistent increase until it
 has seen all states. It is interesting to note that VBE is able to cover the state-space with just 1 RQF
 in the ensemble, whereas the rest of the algorithms require much bigger ensembles and still fail to
 cover the state-space (Table 1). This highlights the ability of VBE to provide first-visit optimism
 and do deep exploration. 
 5.3 Comparison in Classic Environments 

 
 10000 
 8000 
 6000 
 4000 
 2000 
 0 100 200 300 400 500 
 Number of steps ( 100) 
 drawer 
 detalumuccA 
 0VBE VBE ACB 
 20 RND BDQN 
 RND ACB 40 BDQN 
 60 
 80 
 100 200 300 400 500 
 Number of steps ( 100) 
 (a) River Swim 
 edosipe 
 rep draweR 
 0.25 
 0.20 
 0.15 
 0.10 
 0.05 
 0.00 100 200 300 400 500 
 Number of steps ( 100) 
 (b) Puddle World 
 nruter 
 cidosipE 
 VBE 1.0 
 0.8 
 0.6 BDQN 0.4 
 0.2 
 ACB RND 
 0.0 100 200 300 400 500 
 Number of steps ( 1000) 
 (c) Mountain Car 
 edosipe 
 rep draweR 
 (d) Deepsea 
 Figure 2: Online performance in River Swim, Puddle World, Mountain Car, and Deepsea. Higher
 on the y-axis is better. The x-axis denotes the number of interaction steps with the environment. The
 shaded region corresponds to standard errors. 
 In this section we compare VBE with DQN-P, BDQN, ACB, and RND on the four classic control
 environments. In Figure 2, we see that VBE learns faster and reaches the best final performance
 in all four environments. Surprisingly, DQN-P is competitive with BDQN in three out of the four
 environments. InDeepsea, where persistent optimismis essential to reach the state with high reward,
 DQN-P fails. ACB and RND both fail to learn in the sparse reward domain Mountain Car, whereas,
 in Puddle World which has a denser reward structure, they perform better. RND is competitive in
 River Swim and Puddle World, however, it fails to learn the optimal policy in the majority of runs in
 Deepsea. ACB is competitive in Puddle World but fails in Deepsea. We compare VBE with PPObased variants of ACB and RND in classic control environments in Appendix B.2, and their linear
 counterparts in Appendix D. 
 5.4 Atari 
 In this section we test VBE on several hard exploration Atari games, namely Private-Eye, Pitfall,
 Gravitar (Burda et al., 2019), and also on Breakout, Pong and Qbert. We chose this set to ensure a
 good mix of both hard and easy exploration environments Taiga et al. (2021). As is standard, we
 combine four consecutive frames to make the observation (4 84 84), and update agents ever four
 steps. We clip the rewards between [ 1,1], and do 3 runs for all agents for 25 million steps.
 For BDQN, we follow the choices from (Osband et al., 2016b), and use an ensemble size of 10,
 without bootstrapping.4 As in the original BDQN implementation, each value function in the ensemble uses a shared representation network. We use a DDQN update for BDQN to be fair and
 consistent with the rest of the agents. For VBE, we also use an ensemble size of 10 and use a shared
 representation for the RQFs. To further improve the computational complexity we only update the
 RQF heads. ACB uses an ensemble size of k = 128 for computing the reward bonus, and RND uses
 a CNN-based target and predictor with 512 nodes in the final layer. We use c = 10 for all the agents
 in all the environments. Additional implementation details for Atari are mentioned in Appendix A.3
 In Figure 3 we see that VBE performs consistently better than BDQN in all Atari environments.
 In Breakout and Pong, it takes longer for BDQN to achieve the same level of performance as the
 other agents. This could be attributed to random sampling of the value function for the behavior
 4The original BDQN implementation for Atari does not use bootstrapping, that is, all members of the ensemble see the
 samedata. 

 

 Value Bonuses using Ensemble Errors for Exploration in Reinforcement Learning

 
 350 
 300 
 250 
 200 
 150 
 100 
 50 
 0 
 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 
 Number of steps 1e7 
 nruteR 
 cidosipE 
 detnuocsidnU 
 20 
 10 
 0 
 ACB 10 VBE 
 BDQN 
 RND 20 
 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 
 Number of steps 1e7 
 (a) Breakout 
 nruteR 
 cidosipE 
 detnuocsidnU 
 17500 
 15000 
 12500 
 10000 
 7500 
 5000 
 2500 
 0 
 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 
 Number of steps 1e7 
 (b) Pong 
 nruteR 
 cidosipE 
 detnuocsidnU 
 (c) Q bert 
 0 
 100 
 200 
 300 
 400 
 500 
 600 
 700 
 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 
 Number of steps 1e7 
 nruteR 
 cidosipE 
 detnuocsidnU 
 1500 
 1000 
 500 
 0 
 500 
 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 
 Number of steps 1e7 
 (d) Pitfall 
 nruteR 
 cidosipE 
 detnuocsidnU 
 500 
 400 
 300 
 200 
 100 
 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 
 Number of steps 1e7 
 (e) Private-Eye 
 nruteR 
 cidosipE 
 detnuocsidnU 
 (f) Gravitar 
 Figure 3: Online performance in six Atari games, with shaded regions corresponding to standard
 errors. The x-axis is the number of environment interaction steps in millions, and the y-axis is the
 online Undiscounted Episodic Return, where higher is better. The environments in the second row
 are considered to be more challenging in terms of exploration. 
 policy, thus requiring more time for all value functions to adjust. In Qbert and Gravitar, BDQN
 plateaus before the other agents, suggesting less exploration in these environments compared to the
 other agents. In Pitfall, BDQN does well in the beginning, but then fails to maintain a good policy
 in the later stages of training. ACB shows early learning in Pong, but then fails to converge to an
 optimal policy. Similarly in Qbert, ACB converges to a suboptimal policy, suggesting that ACB s
 value bonus is not suitable in these environments. In Breakout and Pitfall, ACB performs similarly
 to VBE, with ACB being slightly better in Breakout towards the end. In Gravitar, ACB is slow in the
 early stages of the training but then surpasses VBE in the later stages. RND performs very similar
 to VBE in Breakout, Pong, and Qbert, and is slightly better in Pitfall. However, in Gravitar, RND
 seems to do much better than all the other agents initially, but then fails to maintain that performance
 and drops down matching VBE. In Private-Eye none of the agents do well; however, VBE seems to
 be collecting a higher reward more often than the other agents. 
 The exact reason for an agent s performance in complex environments like Atari is hard to discern,
 and is something that requires additional understanding. However, after showcasing the efficacy of
 VBE in more controlled settings, the purpose of this experiment is to demonstrate that VBE can
 easily be extended to more complex environments and can even surpass or be at par with other
 exploratory baselines. In Appendix C we demonstrate that variants of VBE can further improve on
 these results. 
 6 Conclusion 
 In this work we introduced a new approach to do directed exploration in deep RL, called Value
 Bonuses with Ensemble errors (VBE). The utility of value bonuses is that it is simple to layer on top
 of an existing algorithm: the value bonuses are separately estimated and only impact the behavior
 policy. Improving how we estimate value bonuses, therefore, provides a promising path to replacing
 simple, but undirected exploration strategies like -greedy. To date, the primary way to estimate
 value bonuses has been to estimate a separate value function on reward bonuses, as was done for
 ACB and RND. However, this approach does not encourage first-visit optimism; it only encourages
 revisiting an action once a reward bonus is observed. We show that, in general, ACB and RND fail
 to provide effective exploration in classic control environments. In contrast, on Atari, VBE scales
 well to more complex environments and performs on par with, if not better than, existing baselines.

 

 Reinforcement Learning Journal 2025 

 
 Appendix: A Discussion on Convergence Criteria for Value Bonuses 

 First let us discuss how the theory for LSTD applies to our setting. The result from (Tagorti & Scherrer, 2015, Corollary 1) bounds the error of the value function learned under LSTD to the true value
 function, assuming features are linearly independent (Assumption 1) and a mixing assumption for
 the environment and behavior policy (Assumption 2). This bound includes an error to the best linear
 solution, for infinite data, and the error between the best linear solution and the true value function.
 Because we are in the realizable case and the objective is convex for linear function approximation,
 the best linear solution is the true value function and in the limit of data the LSTD solution will reach
 this best linear solution. We can write this as a corollary of their result. Note their result is written
 by value functions, but automatically extends to action-value function by considering state-action
 features and stationary distribution (s,a) = (s) (a|s). 
 b b 
 Corollary 1 (Corollary following from [Theorem 1) (Tagorti & Scherrer, 2015)] Assume we are
 given behavior policy with stationary distribution and target policy and the rewards are
 b 
 defined using a randomly sampled f from the set of linear functions on features (s,a) and the
 i 
 formula in Equation (3). Under Assumption 1 and 2 from (Tagorti & Scherrer, 2015), for a large
 enough number of samples T given by (Tagorti & Scherrer, 2015, Eq 6) (called n in their result),
 then f returned by LSTD satisfies 
 wi 

 E [(f (s,a) f (s,a))2] O(1/ T) 
 s a b( |s) wi i 
 Now let us discuss how the work on neural TD applies to our setting (Cai et al., 2019). The result is
 proved for neural networks with a single hidden layer using a ReLU activation for the hidden layer,
 with the additional condition that the stationary distribution for the policy has a bounded density

 over states and the stepsizes decrease at a rate of 1/ t. This result immediately implies that our f
 wi 
 should converge to f , because the global solution for this problem is f because it is in the value
 i i 
 function class. We state this as a corollary of their result here, to be clear about how it applies.
 Corollary 2 (Corollary following from [Theorem 4.6) (Cai et al., 2019)] Assume that 1) the
 policy is fixed with stationary distribution , where (s) (a|s) has bounded density across
 the space x = (s,a) 2) the function class F = { 1 
 m 
 (cid:80)m 
 j=1 
 b 
 j 
 max(x w 
 j 
 ,0)|W = 
 (b ,...,b ,w ,...,w ),||W W(0)|| B} for x = (s,a), W(0) a point at which the
 1 m 1 m 2 
 weights are initialized in the algorithm and B some constant, 3) x = 1 for all x and the re-
 2 
 wards are defined using a randomly sampled f from F and the formula in Equation (3), and
 i 
 4) the Neural TD algorithm (Algorithm 1 in (Cai et al., 2019)) is run for T steps with stepsize

 = min((1 )/8,1/ T). Then the algorithm returns f that satisfies 
 wi 
 O(B2) 
 E [(f (s,a) f (s,a))2] + O(B2m 1/2 + B5/2m 1/4) 
 W , wi i 
 (1 )2 T 
 Proof: The result also requires that the reward magnitudes are all bounded, which they are by
 construction. Theorem 4.6 states that the outputted action-value function is bounded as above to the
 global optimum in the function class. Because f (s,a) is in the function class, we know it is the
 i 
 global optimum. 
 Acknowledgments 
 We would like to thank NSERC, CIFAR, and Amii for research funding and the Digital Research
 Alliance of Canada for computational resources. 

 

 Value Bonuses using Ensemble Errors for Exploration in Reinforcement Learning

 
 References 
 Yasin Abbasi-Yadkori, D vid P l, and Csaba Szepesv ri. Improved algorithms for linear stochastic
 bandits. Advances in neural information processing systems, 24, 2011.

 Yasin Abbasi-Yadkori, Nevena Lazic, Csaba Szepesvari, and Gellert Weisz. Exploration-enhanced
 politex. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.10479, 2019. 
 Jordan T. Ash, Cyril Zhang, Surbhi Goel, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Sham M. Kakade.
 Anti-concentrated confidence bonuses for scalable exploration. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
 RXQ-FPbQYVn. 
 Marc G Bellemare, Sriram Srinivasan, Georg Ostrovski, Tom Schaul, David Saxton, and Remi
 Munos. Unifying count-based exploration and intrinsic motivation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2016. 

 Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Amos Storkey, and Oleg Klimov. Exploration by random network
 distillation. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019. URL https:
 //openreview.net/forum?id=H1lJJnR5Ym. 
 Qi Cai, Zhuoran Yang, Jason D Lee, and Zhaoran Wang. Neural Temporal-Difference Learning
 Converges to Global Optima. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019.
 Leshem Choshen, Lior Fox, and Yonatan Loewenstein. DORA the explorer: Directed outreaching
 reinforcement action-selection. CoRR, 2018. 

 Kamil Ciosek, Vincent Fortuin, Ryota Tomioka, Katja Hofmann, and Richard Turner. Conservative uncertainty estimation by fitting prior networks. In International Conference on Learning
 Representations, 2020. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=BJlahxHYDS.
 Bo Dai, Niao He, Yunpeng Pan, Byron Boots, and Le Song. Learning from conditional distributions
 via dual embeddings. In Artificial Intelligence and Statistics. PMLR, 2017.

 R Grande, T Walsh, and J How. Sample efficient reinforcement learning with gaussian processes.
 In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2014. 
 David Janz, Jiri Hron, Przemys aw Mazur, Katja Hofmann, Jos Miguel Hern ndez-Lobato, and Sebastian Tschiatschek. Successor uncertainties: Exploration and uncertainty in temporal difference
 learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019.
 Raksha Kumaraswamy, Matthew Schlegel, Adam White, and Martha White. Context-dependent
 upper-confidence bounds for directed exploration. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.06629, 2018.

 Lihong Li, Wei Chu, John Langford, and Robert E Schapire. A contextual-bandit approach to
 personalized news article recommendation. In World Wide Web Conference, 2010.
 Brendan O Donoghue, Ian Osband, Remi Munos, and Vlad Mnih. The Uncertainty Bellman Equation and Exploration. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2018.

 I Osband, B Van Roy, and Z Wen. Generalization and exploration via randomized value functions.
 In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2016a. 
 Ian Osband, Charles Blundell, Alexander Pritzel, and Benjamin Van Roy. Deep exploration via
 bootstrapped dqn. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2016b.

 Ian Osband, John Aslanides, and Albin Cassirer. Randomized Prior Functions for Deep Reinforcement Learning. NeurIPS, 2018. 
 Ian Osband, Benjamin Van Roy, Daniel J Russo, Zheng Wen, et al. Deep exploration via randomized
 value functions. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 20(124):1 62, 2019. 

 

 

 

 Reinforcement Learning Journal 2025 

 
 Ian Osband, Zheng Wen, Seyed Mohammad Asghari, Vikranth Dwaracherla, Morteza Ibrahimi,
 Xiuyuan Lu, and Benjamin Van Roy. Approximate Thompson Sampling via Epistemic Neural
 Networks. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, 2023. 
 Georg Ostrovski, Marc G Bellemare, A ron van den Oord, and R mi Munos. Count-based exploration with neural density models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2017.

 Andrew Patterson, Adam White, and Martha White. A generalized projected bellman error for offpolicy value estimation in reinforcement learning. The Journal of Machine Learning Research,
 2022. 
 Manel Tagorti and Bruno Scherrer. On the Rate of Convergence and Error Bounds for LSTD( ). In
 Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2015.
 Adrien Ali Taiga, William Fedus, Marlos C Machado, Aaron Courville, and Marc G Bellemare. On bonus-based exploration methods in the arcade learning environment. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2109.11052, 2021. 

 Hado Van Hasselt, Arthur Guez, and David Silver. Deep reinforcement learning with double qlearning. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, 2016.
 Yining Wang, Ruosong Wang, Simon S Du, and Akshay Krishnamurthy. Optimism in reinforcement
 learning with generalized linear function approximation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.04136, 2019.

 Zhikang T Wang and Masahito Ueda. Convergent and efficient deep q network algorithm. In
 International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. 
 Martha White. Unifying task specification in reinforcement learning. In International Conference
 on Machine Learning, 2017. 

 Lin Zhao, Huaqing Xiong, and Yingbin Liang. Faster non-asymptotic convergence for double qlearning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Value Bonuses using Ensemble Errors for Exploration in Reinforcement Learning

 Supplementary Materials 

 The following content was not necessarily subject to peer review.

 
 A Experiment Details 

 A.1 Environment Details 

 Mountain Car is classic control problem of driving an underpowered car up a mountain. The
 original problem is set up as cost-to-goal, and here to frame it as a challenging exploration problem
 we offset the reward by 1, making it a sparse reward problem. The start state is sampled from the
 range [ 0.6, 0.4], which is the valley between two mountains, and the car starts with velocity zero.
 Puddle World is a continuous state 2-dimensional world with (x,y) [0,1]2 with 2 intersecting
 puddles: (1) [0.45,0.4] to [0.45,0.8], and (2) [0.1,0.75] to [0.45,0.75]. The puddles have a radius
 of 0.1 and the goal is the region (x,y) [0.95,1.0],[0.95,1.0]. The problem is cost-to-goal with
 additional penalty for when the agent is either puddle. The penalty for being in a puddle is inversely
 proportional to the distance of the agent from the center of the puddle, i.e., higher negative reward
 for being closer to the center. The agent chooses a direction of movement, resulting in displacement equal to 0.005 + , N( = 0, = 0.1) in the chosen direction. The starting positions
 for episodes is uniformly sampled from (x,y) [0.1,0.3],[0.45,0.65]. High variance transitions
 coupled with high magnitude penalties make this a challenging exploration problem.
 River Swim is a standard continuing exploration benchmark inspired by a fish trying to swim upriver, with high reward (+1) upstream which is difficult to reach and, a lower but still positive reward
 (+0.005), which is easily reachable downstream. The state space is continuous in [0,1], and the
 stochastic displacement is equal to 0.1 + , N( = 0, = 0.01) in the direction of the chosen
 action up or down. As swimming upstream is difficult, action up is stochastically switched to down.
 We also flip the observation such that the high reward is at observation 0 and the lower reward is at
 observation 1. We do this because we noticed that using random initialization with ReLU activations
 would mostly result in a higher value for a higher input thus favouring the correct action in this case.
 The starting position is sampled uniformly in [0.9,1.0]. 
 Deepsea is a finite-horizon episodic grid world environment, which poses a hard exploration challenge. In each state the agent can take two actions, left or right. Every action moves the agent down
 one row with column change being controlled by the chosen action. Collisions to the grid edges are
 handled by the agent staying in the same column but moving down one row. Given the transition
 structure, the agent can never access the states in the top-right triangle of the grid. Therefore, the
 total number of states are N (N+1). The most rewarding state is the state on the bottom-right cor-
 2 
 ner of the grid. To reach this state successfully in an episode, the agent needs to take the action that
 moves it towards right at every step. However, there is a penalty of 0.01 for taking this action in
 N 
 every state, except for in the high rewarding state where the agent gets a reward of 1 for taking the
 right action. This transition and reward structure make it a very challenging environment. A policy
 that explores uniform randomly has a probability of 2 N of reaching the highly rewarding state in
 any episode. 
 A.2 Algorithm Details for Classics Control 
 In the classic control experiments (Section 5.3), every agent uses the same neural architecture, containing 2 hidden non-linear layers with 50 nodes each and ReLU activation, followed by a linear
 output-layer. DQN-P, BDQN, VBE, ACB, and RND all use target networks which are updated
 periodically after every steps. For DQN-P and BDQN = 4 works best for all four classic environments, as used by the BDQN paper. VBE, ACB and RND use = 4 for Mountain Car, Puddle
 World and River Swim, and = 64 for Deepsea. We use a learning rate of = 0.001 and a discount
 factor of = 0.99. DQN-P, BDQN and VBE variants use an experience replay buffer that stores the

 

 

 Reinforcement Learning Journal 2025 

 
 most recent 50K transitions. The agent s parameters are updated after every step using a randomly
 sampled mini-batch of 128. We sweep the agents on bonus scales c = [1.0,3.0,10.0], and ensemble
 sizes k = [1,2,8,20]. The PPO version of ACB uses an ensemble size of k = 128, and RND uses
 a multi-layer neural network instead of an ensemble. Tables 1, and 2 show the best performing sets
 of ensemble size k and bonus scale c for results in Sections 5.2, and 5.3, correspondingly.
 Deepsea 
 VBE k = 1,c = 1.0 
 VBE-SL k = 20,c = 1.0 
 DQN-P k = 1,c = 1.0 
 BDQN k = 20,c = 1.0 
 ACB k = 20,c = 1.0 
 RND c = 1.0 

 Table 1: Ensemble size k and bonus scale c for agents in Figure 1a.

 River Swim Puddle World Mountain Car Deepsea 
 VBE k = 20,c = 1.0 k = 1,c = 10.0 k = 2,c = 1.0 k = 20,c = 1.0 
 DQN-P k = 1,c = 10.0 k = 1,c = 3.0 k = 1,c = 1.0 k = 1,c = 10.0 
 BDQN k = 8,c = 10.0 k = 2,c = 1.0 k = 20,c = 1.0 k = 20,c = 10.0
 ACB k = 20,c = 10.0 k = 1,c = 1.0 k = 8,c = 1.0 k = 20,c = 1.0 
 RND c = 10.0 c = 1.0 c = 1.0 c = 1.0 

 Table 2: Ensemble size k and bonus scale c for agents in Figure 2.

 
 A.3 Algorithm Details for Atari 

 All the agents used in Atari experiments use the same architecture: A representation network with
 3 CNN layers followed by a value function head containing one hidden layer with Relu activation
 and a final linear layer. We use a DDQN update for all agents and update every 4 steps. We update
 the target networks every 10000 steps. We use a replay buffer that stores 1 million of the most
 recent transitions and discount factor of 0.99. Finally, we use Adam optimizer with a learning rate
 of 0.0000625. 
 B Comparing VBE with PPO based variants of ACB and RND 

 In this section we compare VBE with PPO-based variants of ACB and RND as they were originally
 implemented and evaluated we call these algorithm ACB-PPO and RND-PPO, respectively. We
 use the opensource implementation of PPO-based ACB and RND as provided by Ash et al. (2022)5.
 To ensure that each algorithm uses the same amount of data, we use a single agent interacting with
 the environment for ACB-PPO and RND-PPO, instead of parallel agents interacting with parallel
 instances of the environment. Using a softmax policy and parallel agents interacting with the environments can also help with exploration, so to be fair we use only one instance of agent-environment
 interaction, as is done for VBE. 

 B.1 Pure Exploration 

 In this section we first compare VBE with PPO-based variants of ACB and RND in the pure exploration setting. Similar to in Section 5.2, we use one-hot encoding and linear function approximation
 for all the agents. The agents observe no environment reward and are behaving only with respect
 5Seehttps://github.com/JordanAsh/acb/tree/main 

 

 

 

 Value Bonuses using Ensemble Errors for Exploration in Reinforcement Learning

 
 to the exploration strategy employed by each of these algorithms. In Figure 4 we see that the PPObased variants of ACB and RND cover much more of the state-space compared to their Value-based
 (VB) counterparts in Figure 1a. This may be due to the fact that PPO-based variants of ACB and
 RND use a softmax behaviour policy, which can cause the agent to take the non-greedy actions at
 random. In Figure 4b we see that ACB-PPO almost flatlines and stops visiting new states after sometime. However, RND-PPO keeps on visiting new states. Although this is a significant improvement,
 however, both ACB-PPO and RND-PPO still fail to cover the state-space.

 
 1200 

 1000 

 800 
 600 

 400 

 200 

 0 
 30 35 40 45 50 
 Grid size 
 detisiv 
 setats 
 euqinu 
 fo rebmuN 
 Total number of states DQN-P ACB-PPO 1275 
 VBE BDQN RND-PPO 
 VBE-SL 1109 
 1035 
 930 932 922 
 884 
 850 
 820 811 
 740 747 731 
 630 630 615 617 
 584 
 465 465 490 495 386 401 439 368 418 
 337 
 209 228 
 (a) State coverage in Deepsea of different grid sizes 
 1200 
 1000 
 800 
 600 
 400 
 200 
 0 100 200 300 400 
 Number of steps ( 1000) 
 detisiv 
 setats 
 euqinu 
 fo 
 rebmuN 
 Figure 4: Contrasting the state coverage abilities
 VBE RND-PPO ofexplorationalgorithmsinDeepSea. In(a)each
 bar corresponds to the total number of unique
 BDQN 
 statesvisitedbyanagentaftercompleting10,000
 episodes. The black stars indicate the total num- ACB-PPO
 ber of unique states for each grid size. Notably,
 VBE-SL VBE covers the entire state space, even for the
 larger grid sizes. (b) displays the progression of
 DQN-P unique states visited by agents over the course
 of learning for Deepsea with grid size 50. The
 dotted line represents the total number of unique
 states (1275) in this environment. It provides evidence that VBE consistently explores new states
 (b) Progression of unique states visited (grid size 50) 
 at a significantly higher rate. 
 B.2 Classic Control 
 The chosen hyperparmaters of ACB-PPO and RND-PPO as compared to VBE for classic control
 domains are shown in Table 3. Figure 5 shows the result comparing these algorithms. In general, across the domains the PPO-variants perform similar to, or poorer than, their VB variants in
 Figure 2. VBE, and BDQN, outperform them across domains. Even DQN-P is competitive with
 them, or better in all domains except Deepsea. Compared to their VB variants, the performance of
 the PPO variants drops in River Swim, and Puddle World, and continues to be the same in Mountain Car. In Deepsea RND-PPO improves upon its VB variant RND, while ACB-PPO continues to
 perform similarly to ACB. 

 

 Reinforcement Learning Journal 2025 

 
 10000 VBE 8000 BDQN 6000 

 4000 DQN-P 
 2000 ACB-PPO RND-PPO 0 
 100 200 300 400 500 
 Number of steps (x100) 
 draweR detalumuccA 0 VBE -20 -40 RND-PPO DQN-P 
 -60 ACB-PPO BDQN 
 -80 
 100 200 300 400 500 
 Number of steps (x100) 
 (a) River Swim 
 nruteR cidosipE detnuocsidnU 0.25 VBE DQN-P 0.20 0.15 
 0.10 BDQN 
 0.05 ACB-PPO ACB-PPO 0.00 
 100 200 300 400 500 
 Number of steps (x100) 
 (b) Puddle World 
 nruteR cidosipE 1.0 VBE BDQN 0.8 RND-PPO 0.6
 DQN-P 0.2 
 ACB-PPO 0.0 
 100 200 300 400 500 
 Number of steps (x1000)
 (c) Mountain Car 
 nruteR cidosipE detnuocsidnU 0.4
 (d) Deepsea 
 Figure 5: Online performance of PPO-based variants of ACB and RND in River Swim, Puddle
 World, Mountain Car, and Deepsea. Higher on the y-axis is better. The x-axis denotes the number
 of interaction steps with the environment. The shaded region corresponds to standard errors.
 River Swim Puddle World Mountain Car Deepsea 
 VBE k = 20,c = 1.0 k = 1,c = 10.0 k = 2,c = 1.0 k = 20,c = 1.0
 ACB (k = 128) c = 1.0 c = 3.0 c = 1.0 c = 10.0 
 RND c = 1.0 c = 10.0 c = 10.0 c = 1.0 
 Table 3: Ensemble size k and bonus scale c for agents in Figure 5.
 350 
 300 
 250 
 200 
 150 
 100 
 50 
 0 
 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 
 Number of steps 1e7 
 nruteR 
 cidosipE 
 detnuocsidnU 
 20 
 10 
 0 
 10 VBE 
 VBE update rep c=10 
 VBE update rep c=1 20 
 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 
 Number of steps 1e7 
 (a) Breakout 
 nruteR 
 cidosipE 
 detnuocsidnU 
 16000 
 14000 
 12000 
 10000 
 8000 
 6000 
 4000 
 2000 
 0 
 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4
 Number of steps 1e7 
 (b) Pong 
 nruteR 
 cidosipE 
 detnuocsidnU 
 (c) Q bert 
 0 
 100 
 200 
 300 
 400 
 500 
 600 
 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 
 Number of steps 1e7 
 nruteR 
 cidosipE 
 detnuocsidnU 
 1500 
 1000 
 500 
 0 
 500 
 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 
 Number of steps 1e7 
 (d) Pitfall 
 nruteR 
 cidosipE 
 detnuocsidnU 
 400 
 300 
 200 
 100 
 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4
 Number of steps 1e7 
 (e) Private-Eye 
 nruteR 
 cidosipE 
 detnuocsidnU 
 (f) Gravitar 
 Figure 6: Comparing the online performance of VBE and two of its variants on six Atari environments. We do 3 runs for each agent for 15 Million steps. 
 C An alternate variant of VBE for Atari 
 The VBE in Section 5.4 uses a shared representation for RQFs and only updates the RQF head to
 reduce computational complexity. In this section, we test another variant of VBE that has a separate
 representation network for each RQF and updates the entire network. We also test this new variant
 with a smaller bonus-scale c = 1. The purpose of this experiment was to test whether reducing
 the representational ability of VBE by using a shared representation and not updating it can hinder
 its learning capabilities. However, we observe that the base variant of VBE can keep up with its
 more parameterized counterpart. In Breakout and Pong, the variant with learnable representation
 networks shows slight improvements compared to the base VBE. We also note that using a smaller
 c can affect the performance in hard exploration environments. In Pitfall, VBE with c = 1 performs
 well initially but then takes a dip after 10 million steps. Consistent with all other agents, VBE s
 variants are unable to learn on Private Eye, however, base VBE and the variant with c = 1 collects
 higher rewards more often. In Gravitar, VBE with c = 1 does exceptionally well compared to the

 

 Value Bonuses using Ensemble Errors for Exploration in Reinforcement Learning

 
 other variants and matches the performance of RND in Figure 3f. This experiment reveals that our
 design choices for using a shared representation for RQFs and only updating the RQF heads is valid
 and allows the agent to explore. It further reveals that more investigation is needed to understand
 the role of bonus-scale in these environments. With more compute resources, and search over the
 hyperparameters can potentially identify a variant of VBE that can perform even better on these
 environments. 

 D Linear Function Approximation 

 In this section we test VBE and the baseline agents on the same four classic environments as in
 Section 5.3, with tile-coded features and linear function approximation. We use the following
 tile-coding parameters River Swim :(tiles = 4,tiling = 32,features = 128), Puddle World:
 (tiles = 5,tiling = 5,features = 128), and Mountain Car: (tiles = 4,tiling = 16,features =
 512). The results in Figure 7 are similar to their neural network counterpart results in Figure 2, in
 that VBE does best or is competitive across all domains. RND and ACB perform similarly in all
 domains being competitive with VBE in Puddle World and Mountain Car, but failing in River
 Swim and Deepsea. BDQN outperforms VBE in Deepsea marginally. DQN-P is competitive with
 BDQN in all domains except Deepsea outperforming it in in Puddle World and Mountain Car.
 We also compare VBE, BDQN, and DQN-P to PPO-based variants of ACB and RND in Figure 8.
 ACB-PPO s performance drops with respect to ACB in all domains. RND-PPO on the other hand
 improves in Deepsea to be competitive with BDQN and VBE, has a high rate of improvement later
 towards later learning in River Swim, while dropping in perfomance in both Puddle World and
 Mountain Car with respect to its value-based variant. 

 10000 
 VBE 8000 
 6000 ACB 4000 BDQN 
 2000 RND DQN-P 0 100 200 300 400 500 

 Number of steps ( 100) 
 drawer 
 detalumuccA 
 10 
 20 30 
 40 50 100 200 300 400 500 
 Number of steps ( 100) 
 (a) River Swim 
 edosipe 
 rep draweR 
 0.06 
 BDQN 
 0.05 VBE 
 0.04 
 RND 0.03 DQN-P 0.02 
 ACB 0.01 0.00 100 200 300 400 500 
 Number of steps ( 100) 
 (b) Puddle World 
 nruter 
 cidosipE 
 1.0 
 0.8 VBE 
 ACB 0.6 RND 0.4 
 DQN-P 0.2 BDQN 0.0 100 200 300 400 500
 Number of steps ( 1000)
 (c) Mountain Car 
 edosipe 
 rep draweR 
 BDQN 
 VBE 
 ACB DQN-P RND 
 (d) Deepsea 
 Figure 7: Online performance in River Swim, Puddle World, Mountain Car, and Deepsea, with tilecoded features and linear function approximation. Higher on the y-axis is better. The x-axis denotes
 the number of interaction steps with the environment. The shaded region corresponds to standard
 errors. 
 10000 
 8000 
 6000 4000 
 2000 0 100 200 300 400 500 
 Number of steps ( 100) 
 drawer 
 detalumuccA 
 0 10 
 VBE 20 
 30 RND-PPO 40 50 
 60 BDQN ACB-PPODQN-P 70 100 200 300 400 500 
 Number of steps ( 100) 
 (a) River Swim 
 edosipe 
 rep draweR 
 VBE BDQN 0.05 
 DQN-P 0.04 RND-PPO 
 0.03 ACB-PPO 0.02 
 0.01 0.00 100 200 300 400 500 
 Number of steps ( 100) 
 (b) Puddle World 
 nruter 
 cidosipE 
 1.0 
 VBE 0.8 
 0.6 DQN-P 0.4 
 BDQN 0.2 ACB-PPO RND-PPO 0.0 100 200 300 400 500
 Number of steps ( 1000)
 (c) Mountain Car 
 edosipe 
 rep draweR 
 BDQN RND-PPO 
 VBE 
 ACB-PPO DQN-P 
 (d) Deepsea 
 Figure 8: Online performance of PPO-based variants of ACB and RND in River Swim, Puddle
 World, Mountain Car, and Deepsea, with tile-coded features and linear function approximation.
 Higher on the y-axis is better. The x-axis denotes the number of interaction steps with the environment. The shaded region corresponds to standard errors. 

 

 Reinforcement Learning Journal 2025 

 
 E Parameter Sensitivity of VBE: Ensemble Size Bonus Scale 

 In this section we show the effect that bonus scales and ensemble sizes have on the performance of
 the VBEin each ofthe four classiccontrol environments. In Figure 9we show thesensitivity of VBE
 used in Section 5.3 to its two parameters ensemble size and bonus scale in each environment.
 For River Swim we see that the performance improves as the bonus scale and the ensemble size is
 increased. This makes sense as River Swim is a hard exploration environment and requires more
 aggressive exploration. In Puddle World and Mountain Car, we observe that increasing the bonus
 scale and the ensemble size harms the performance, since they do not require too much exploration.
 For Deepsea we only test a bonus scale of 1 with different ensemble sizes on different grid sizes. We
 can see that only an ensemble size of 20 works well on all grid sizes. Figure 10 shows the parameter
 sensitivity results for the linear function approximation case. We observe a very similar pattern to
 its neural network counterpart across all the environments. 
 10000 
 8000 
 6000 
 4000 HHeeaaddss==11 2000 HHeeaaddss==22 HHeeaaddss==88 
 0 HHeeaaddss==2200 
 1 3 10 
 Bonus scale 
 drawer 
 detalumuccA 
 .gvA 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 1 3 10 
 Bonus-scale 
 (a) River Swim 
 nruter 
 cidosipE 
 .gvA 
 0.25 
 0.20 
 0.15 
 0.10 0.05 
 1 3 10 
 Bonus-scale 
 (b) Puddle World 
 edosipe 
 rep 
 nruteR .gvA 
 VBE 
 10000 
 8000 
 6000 
 4000 2000 
 0 
 30 35 40 45 50 
 Gridsize 
 (c) Mountain Car 
 nrael 
 ot emiT 
 (d) Deepsea 
 Figure 9: Shows the effect of different bonus scales and ensemble sizes across the classic control
 environments. For Deepsea, we only use a bonus scale of 1 and test different ensemble sizes.
 10000 
 8000 6000 
 4000 HHeeaaddss==11 2000 HHeeaaddss==22 HHeeaaddss==88 
 0 HHeeaaddss==2200 
 1 3 10 
 Bonus scale 
 drawer detalumuccA 
 .gvA 
 1 
 2 3 
 4 5 
 6 
 1 3 10 
 Bonus-scale 
 (a) River Swim 
 nruter cidosipE 
 .gvA 
 0.006 VBE 
 0.004 
 0.002 
 0.000 
 1 3 10 
 Bonus-scale 
 (b) Puddle World 
 edosipe rep 
 nruteR .gvA 
 VBE 10000 H H H H e e e e a a a a d d d d s s s s = = = = 1 2 1 2 b b o o n n u u s s - - s s c c a a l l e e = = 1 3
 HHeeaaddss==88 bonus-scale=10 8000 HHeeaaddss==2200 6000
 4000 2000 
 0 
 30 35 40 45 50 
 Gridsize 
 (c) Mountain Car 
 nrael 
 ot emiT 
 (d) Deepsea 
 Figure 10: Shows the effect of different bonus scales and ensemble sizes across the classic control
 environments. These results correspond to the linear function approximation case.
 F Target Policy Experiments 
 Inthisframeworkwherewehaveaccesstotwoformsofvaluefunctions theaction-values, andtheir
 correspondingbonuses therearetwofundamentallearningupdatesthatwecanemploy on-policy,
 or off-policy. As we are in the control setting, we choose the off-policy q-learning update that tries
 to estimate q directly in VBE. In this section we explore the impact of this choice by comparing the
 two updates: (1) on-policy updates where the target policy is the same as the behaviour policy, and
 (2) off-policy updates, which is the one employed by VBE, where the target policy is different from
 thebehaviourpolicy. Theformerusesanoptimistictargetpolicythatmaximizesoverq(s,.)+b(s,.),
 whereas the latter uses a greedy target policy that maximizes over q(s,.) alone.
 In Figure 11 we show the performance of the agents resulting from the two different updates, run on
 different grid sizes of Deepsea, with different ensemble size represented by the different colors, and
 different bonus scales represented by different shapes. The agents use linear function approximation
 for learning the action-value function and RQFs. We can see that the greedy agent generally performs better than the optimistic agent, which makes sense as the optimistic target policy can cause

 

 Value Bonuses using Ensemble Errors for Exploration in Reinforcement Learning

 
 Optimistic Greedy 

 

 

 Grid sizes 
 Figure 11: Comparing Optimistic target policy (On-policy) with Greedy target policy (Off-policy)
 on different grid sizes of Deepsea. 

 10000 
 8000 

 6000 

 4000 
 2000 

 0 
 30 35 40 45 50 
 Grid size 
 nrael 
 ot 
 emiT 
 VBE 10000 
 ACB 
 RND 
 8000 
 6000 
 4000 
 2000 
 0 
 30 35 40 45 50 
 Grid size 
 (a) Optimistic target policy 
 nrael 
 ot 
 emiT 
 VBE 
 ACB 
 RND 
 (b) Greedy target policy 
 Figure 12: This figure compare optimistic target policy to Greedy target policy: (a) the agents use
 an on-policy (optimistic) updates, and (b) the agents use an off-policy (greedy) updates. ACB and
 RND fail with the greedy policy, whereas with optimistic target policy they outperform VBE. VBE
 however, does well with a greedy policy compared to the optimistic one. These agents use a single
 linear-layer with bias term. 
 more exploration. The greedy agent performs well even with multiple RQFs, whereas optimistic
 agent fails to learn the optimal policy in this fixed budget of steps when the number of RQFs are
 increased. 
 Additionally, we investigated into the role of the target policy in ACB and RND. During these
 experiments with ACB and RND we noticed an interesting phenomenon: using an optimistic target
 policy allows ACB and RND to learn the optimal policy quickly on various grid-sizes of the Deepsea
 environment (Figure 12), and using a greedy target policy for ACB and RND would cause the agents
 tofailtolearntheoptimalpolicy(Figure7d,2d). Thisisinterestingasineithercasewedonotexpect
 ACB and RND to be able to cover the entire state space based on random initialization because these
 reward bonus methods do not provide optimism for unseen state-action pairs that is, they do not
 provide first-visit optimism. Upon investigating the phenomenon, we found out that this happens
 because of the bias term in the linear layer, the momentum term in the optimizer and because the
 intrinsic value function in these methods are designed to be non-episodic. When the optimistic
 target policy is used along with momentum during optimization, the bias term of the approximator
 consistently increases. Since the bias-term is a shared parameter, the increase in its value causes the
 intrinsic action values to start increasing, providing the optimism for unseen action-values as well
 allowing for the agent to cover the state space and thus learn the optimal policy. In case of the
 greedy target policy this phenomenon does not arise; the intrinsic values do not increase, and thus
 the agent fails to cover the state space. In Section 5.2, we show that if we use tabular features with
 a linear-layer without any bias term then ACB and RND fail to cover the state space, reflecting that
 they do not provide first-visit optimism.